# FH Complete S01E03 - Armen Avanessian zu Akzelerationismus & Ethnofuturismen | Future Histories

But what could an actually progressive thinking look like, a thinking that is not merely arrested over coming authorities, ideologies or institutions? In any case, according to Ackselrationism, such political thinking is only possible with the help of a future-oriented and realistic philosophy. Therefore, the assumption that we are at the beginning of a political project and not at the gloomy endpoint of history is crucial. This is the only way to counter the rampant social depression and the constant lowering of expectations for the future. After all, in the face of climate change, increasing cultural homogenization, growing global inequality and the manifest indifference of the markets to these developments, even the most hardened advocates of neoliberalism are running into explanatory difficulties. Today, no one can seriously claim that capitalism is the proven vehicle of general social progress or even its condizio sine qua non. End quote. Condizio sine qua non, for all those who have already forgotten their Latin like me, means a condition without which it does not work. And what you heard there, that was a quote from the introduction of the book Hashtag Acceleration 2, edited by Armen Avanessian and Robin McKay. And Armen Avanessian is our guest today and we're talking about accelerationism and ethnofuturisms. Under this term ethnofuturisms, Armen Avanessian turns his gaze to what forces are mobilizing in narratives of the future in various regions of the world. Here is a short sound bite to illustrate this a bit. The question that arises is how we can still connote the future positively today, how we can think of freedom and emancipation beyond antiquated models of progress. Because the future is never neutral, it is in my diction a chronopolitical terrain. The science fiction author William Gibson once said that the future is already here, it's just unequally distributed. Let me know what you think of the episode, on Twitter under hashtag Future Histories or by email or in our subreddit. And if you want to support Future Histories beyond that, please stop by patreon.com slash Future Histories. Welcome to Future Histories, the podcast to expand our idea of the future. My name is Jan Groß and I am very pleased to welcome Armen Avanessian today. He is a philosopher, close to the political-philosophical theory of accelerationism, and publishes books on current theoretical trends at Mehrbeverlag. Welcome Armen Avanessian. Yes, good afternoon. Perhaps first to one of the constants in your thinking and work. What is accelerationism? Accelerationism is a political theory that resists this dogma a bit in our culture, because also in leftist thinking, that you just always have to decelerate, that you have to slow down. Something has become so entrenched in our minds that you have an equation that says, in a sense, that modernity is one of progress, one of capitalism, and one of acceleration. If one is not one hundred percent in agreement with the state of affairs, how our society is also developing politically and culturally, then it is naturally obvious to say on the basis of this equation that we must reject everything. Progress is negative, acceleration is negative, and accelerationism is actually reminiscent of an underlying counter-tendency in leftist thought actually since Marx. If you read Marx, you are first of all astonished by the way in which, for example, in the Communist Manifesto, he celebrates capitalism as the bringer, so to speak, of change, of transformation, the certain prerogative of the aristocracy, absolutism and so on, that a new bourgeoisie emerges with a new dynamic, but does not go far enough. So there is already with Marx and then later with other thinkers this idea of what would our world look like if we didn't put on the brakes, but if we pushed the dynamics that capitalism also unfolds and pushed capitalism beyond itself. To take a less historical approach, if you look at our party landscape, it is astonishing that the parties that often describe themselves as liberal or neoliberal have very restrictive ideas in certain areas that have not been economic for so long, for example family policy, social policy, migration policy, which no longer have anything to do with liberality. And this is opposed by a left-wing, accelerationist position, so to speak, which says, well, then let's get serious about free warning traffic, let's get serious about free movement of people, let's open the borders. What if we really exploit the potential that is inherent in scientific and technological platforms today, and we don't slow it down in the service of a few, such as Uber or Facebook or you name it, but rather in the service of the general public, and that is the decisive keyword in accelerationism, in the service of the general public and transformation into a post-capitalist society. In other words, the basic thesis of accelerationism is not simply to speed things up, but to further accelerate and exploit the progressive tendencies that are already inherent in today's capitalism. Now, what you are describing is basically what is commonly understood as left-wing accelerationism. There is also a so-called right-wing variant, perhaps in quotation marks. The author Ariadine sums it up quite well in her essay Anmerkungen zur Black Acceleration. The essay appeared in the book you edited, Ethno-Futurisms. So she traces a little bit of this basic position in which she says that right-wing accelerationism, actually represented here by the philosopher Nick Land, glorifies capital as some kind of omnipotent power that inevitably and inexorably shapes and will always shape everything to its liking. In terms of left accelerationism, as you can find it now, for example, in Nix Rinicek and Alex Williams, the authors of the accelerationist manifesto. In relation to this left accelerationism, she then expresses a very interesting breaking point actually. She writes that left accelerationism basically does not dare to cross a certain boundary, namely that of classical humanistic subjectivation. But a strong accelerationism, Ariadine thinks, would basically have to open Pandora's box and question humanistic subjectivation itself. I found that very interesting, because it's true, the liberal subject, that is indeed the anchor point for all kinds of political and economic invocations in advertising. You know, it's quite often said, be yourself, buy XY, but also the legal system, for example, or economics are based on such a subject construction. Now I'm wondering, do you share this assessment of Ariadine, that we should overcome this form of subjectification, that is, the liberal subject explicitly, and if so, how can that look? The next time is always a danger when you have so many isms colliding. It is also a relatively young movement, so to speak, and as with quite a lot of theoretical movements or even artificial movements, the designation does not originally come from the protagonists themselves, but from opponents. There is, so to speak, impressionism, which used to be a dirty word, accelerationism was, so to speak, rather an attack on a certain group, which then asked itself, well, if we are called that, what would be the progressive tendencies, so to speak? That is of course, one should not do scholasticism now and so conceptual history, but roughly one can say, to answer the beginning of your question, that a right-wing accelerationism would be one that would simply say, we can't influence anything. There are, so to speak, no more possibilities for the subject, the individual, or even society as a whole to influence technological developments. Therefore, the only thing to do is to open all the floodgates, so to speak, and let it run its free course. Many progressive left-wing accelerationists don't really find that a preferable option, and left-wing accelerationism is more about saying how you can still introduce control functions without necessarily talking up a strong subject or a classic political subject, again like the politariat or something. But you pointed out that this is, of course, a very controversial position, and in the course of differentiation and further discussion and development, also of accelerationism, there were different approaches, also of criticism. There is an accelerationist feminism, it's called xenopheminism, which has similar starting points, has critical starting points, like the author you quoted. The point is, I've already mentioned it, the question of the extent to which in accelerationism, so to speak, a masculine, sovereign, self-controlling subject is still conceived or created and whether there is no way to undermine that and whether one of the basic errors of classical accelerationism, which has only been around for five or six years, but let's call it that, is not that it is still a white, Western and male theoretical concept, Western and also male theoretical conception and the corresponding practical considerations also have a limitation and in this respect the approach of Ariadin, whom you quoted, is now to say that this subject position must also be cancelled, but these are, I would say, these are not necessarily always new points of criticism, these are, so to speak, front positions that we have already seen for several decades in the postmodern discussion. For at least half a century, for decades, there have been tendencies, so to speak, that put a lot of trust in technology, trust in the promise of new technologies, and then realize with frustration or disappointment or melancholy that the new technologies haven't really led to an abolition of subject positions, but that we are still, so to speak, boring subjects who live in petit-bourgeois nuclear families and now have the Internet. In this respect, as a reaction to this, there are always these more radical, both often feminist, but also from other currents post-colonial representatives, there is always, so to speak, this approach or this vehement criticism of this subject position. And what perspectives are there that could still be interesting when you say that in the last 50 years there has basically been a repetition, if you will, of such a search and failure?
   What perspectives would there be of which you would say, okay, but that remains interesting and also really current? I'm thinking perhaps of forms of non-reactionary transhumanism, for example. Can there be such a thing? Transhumanism basically wants to use technical means to expand the limits of what is humanly possible, both psychologically and physically, as well as intellectually. And that would actually be fundamentally compatible with the dissolution of the subject construction mentioned above, the liberal subject construction. Of course, this is also accompanied by a number of fall paths. So there are also different schools, rather say a techno-deterministic-reactionary position. But I just ask myself, could something like that be thought differently, for example? Are there tendencies where you would say, ok, that might be interesting from a perspective? Well, first of all, accelerationism has a lot of strong affinities with practices, of course, but also theories that rely heavily on new technologies. I have a problem with certain transhumanisms and also in certain versions of posthumanism, because they take on such a before-and-after approach. There was the human being, so to speak, and then there is something completely different. In transhumanism, there's a very strong idea that you can free humans from their physicality, so to speak, and upload them into the cloud, so to speak. So these kinds of ideas that are still very linear thinking. So what interests me about accelerationism is rather a kind of, you could call it, a speculative temporality that doesn't think linearly, that is, from the present towards the future and with the assumption, so to speak, of a consolidated past, for example of man, which is then followed by something else, posthuman, transhuman, but rather a thinking, as it were, out of the future. What new technologies do we have? How can we use them in a progressive way? And to what extent do they push us humans beyond ourselves? So to what extent is the human being, so to speak, something that is just not fixed to him and also cannot be transcended, because he never existed in a certain essence. And that would be, so to speak, the theoretical answer to your question. What very, very concretely and practically and now also politically, I think I see very strong movements or a massive near-insurgency or revolutionary potential in various postcolonial discourses or, think of Black Lives Matters, those are so then the important political insurgency and resistance movements of our time, It is no coincidence that they argue in an anti-capitalist way, but also from a postcolonial and racial point of view, so to speak, and address other issues and not just purely and detached economic issues and political issues, as if they had nothing to do with issues of, with ethnic issues and with issues of climate change, of course. That actually brings us directly to the book you published, Ethno-Futurisms. At least I didn't know the term before. What are ethno-futurisms? First of all, what are futurisms? Futurism is somewhat discredited in our country. Yes, these are totally proto-fascist tendencies of the avant-garde at the beginning of the twentieth century, which operated very martially, very machistically with an avant-garde model of time. That is, straight ahead into the future. And what fascinated me was first of all the migration theories, for example accelerationism, and then into other terranes. And what interested me the furthest was that exactly at a moment, in our country, that is, in the West, under quotation marks, the future no longer has a positive connotation. Yes, when people go out on the street, do a survey, when, let's say, 90 percent of the people say, I hope it won't be too bad in the future. So that at a moment when the future has negative connotations in our country, in other geopolitical areas, and interestingly enough in those of which the colonial West has always claimed that they can't develop culture at all, that they can't think progressively at all, that they can't produce something like history in a temporally linear way. That's where certain forms of futurism emerge. So there is Afrofuturism, there is Sinofuturism, there is Goldfuturism, there are many such forms of futurism. And it appealed to me to collect them, so to speak, and to publish them together under this half neologism, namely as ethnofuturisms. This plural is, so to speak, very important, because ethnofuturisms, these ethnofuturisms, first and foremost resist what one can call ethnopluralism or ethnonationalism. What we see more and more today, so to speak, are certain forms of racism. Not necessarily only a biological racism, but also a Balibar racism, a racism without race. That is, a cultural racism that simply pretends to be very tolerant and says, well, there are just different cultures, they just don't fit together, you have to keep them separate, so to speak. So we don't say, so to speak, that one is more important than the other. Of course, that is always implicitly said, but the discourse is a bit more enlightened, so to speak. And this ethnopluralism says that there are different ethnic groups, which are simply different, so to speak, and have always been so different. These are just cultural differences, they are eternal. These are also biological differences, partly it is claimed. And that translates into a political discourse, into an ethnonationalist discourse, that one must not mix ethnic groups or cultures. And these various ethno-futuristic currents, which I have now collected or which I have tried to produce a little bit, are resisting this quite vehemently. When you make books and initiate discourses, they always have a certain effect. And the question that arises is how we can still today, as I said, connote the future positively, how we can think of freedom and emancipation beyond antiquated models of progress. Because the future is never neutral, it is, in my diction, a chronopolitical terrain. The science fiction author William Gibson once said that the future is already here, it's just unequally distributed. That is, there is little positive future. And the opportunities to develop are unequally distributed. Who has what data about themselves? Who has what job opportunities, promotion opportunities and so on in the first place? So it's these questions that are being asked, and in a very innovative way, long before there was any accelerationism or Black Acceleration, Black Accelerationism, as Ariadne calls it, long before there was, there was Afrofuturism. In recent times there are also Sinofuturisms. These are also not coherent, so to speak, they are not based on a common doctrine or ideology. They are just symptoms, so to speak, of a different interest in the future. For what Kojo Eshun, a protagonist or also a theorist of Afrofuturism, called counter futures. It is so then about producing not only against memory, against memory, against the mainstream or against the dominant hegemonic culture. It's not just about looking to the past, it's about inventing future futures against others as well. That's why, for example, just to give those as an example now, in Afrofuturism, science fiction plays a big role, mythologists play a big role, time travel plays a big role, which not only has something to do with this creative short-circuiting of slavery, displacement, exclusion, migration, and space travel as the most extreme example of spatial alienation, so to speak, but also because the imagination of completely different futures, the invention, the imagination of completely different futures can be experienced and practiced as something liberating. And that is something that is very interesting for me, even in the current political standstill, whereby one should actually say, in the current political regression that we are living in Western Europe, in the USA, in North America, and long story short. I think the question was at some point, where I see interesting counter-movements, in transhumanism and so on, I would say, so few in these theoretical movements that rely on a techno-utopias and ultimately also think, man was natural in the past and now he will, so to speak, with the help of technology, he will live immortal, eternal, pure-spiritual or even more intelligent. I'm more interested in these materialistic currents and ethno-futurisms. You've just mentioned that it's also about not tipping over into such clumsy techno-utopias. How do the ethno-futurisms, for example, manage that? So what does it look like in this form, if one wants to, say, affirm technologies on the one hand, and say, push the use of it for one's own purposes, but at the same time doesn't want to fall into these abbreviations, these pure, flat techno-utopias. How do the ethno-futurisms manage that, for example? How do they deal with technology? Ethno-futurisms are always connoted with technology. Futurism, or even classical futurism, is a celebration of technology. I can't give a general answer, these are completely new phenomena. First of all, secondly, they are, I put it carefully before, they are not completely coherent or homogeneous. You could also put it more drastically, they are in strong contradiction with each other. So to give an example, the way Afro-futurisms have been mixing for several decades, I've already alluded to it, escape attempts by slaves, space travel, fictional elements, mythologems, alien experiences. Think, for example, of the wonderful music and albums of Sanra, the jazz musician. This has relatively little to do with the way in which, for example, in certain Sino-futurist, there is also a Shanghai futurism, that is, how in Sino-futurist currents, so to speak, the realization of Artificial Intelligence, which has long since overtaken humanity, is celebrated as a subcutaneous Asian transmigration. This stands to contradiction. Ethno-futurisms doesn't mean that the, so to speak, there's the boring patriarchal hegemonic West on one side, and then there are the good subversive, enlightened ethno-futurisms. They're not necessarily politically progressive either. In the case of Afro-Futurism, I think that is definitely a progressive current, which has developed extremely, extremely subversive effects out of a certain defensive attitude, both culturally, but also theoretically, philosophically, and also politically. But you can't just generalize that now, I would say. And what can we learn from the various ethno-futurisms in relation to the lack of a range of futures in general?
   Well, that we have to get out of this model, either progress linear, so to speak, or primitive, half-mythical, half-consciously dawning understandings of time that only run in circles, that can't think of change, and so on. Certain time phenomena, which we also have due to technological and highly, so to speak, sharpened economic changes, we find, so to speak, in ethno-futurisms preconceived in a very interesting way, to a certain extent. So I'll just give you two examples. So one is, something that I'm very interested in is how fictions become real. There's a term for that in my theoretical world, which is hyperstition. Hyperstition is superstition, a mixture of superstition, which is superstition and hype. Hyperstition are fictional phenomena that become real, that have potential, that have the capacity to realize themselves, and they do so from the future. So assumptions about the future, from the future, that become real. That's not just science fiction, but think about our digital world, think about algorithms, think about social media, think about what sociologists are already calling us pre-emptive personalities, that algorithms know things about us before we know them about ourselves or regardless of whether we ever know them about ourselves. That means that the future can dispose of us, dispose of the present. Algorithms can suggest things to us, can recommend things to us, can also suggest cures for us in medicine, diseases long before we have them and compellingly control our behavior in the present. This also has many negative tendencies, for example in what is called pre-emptive policing, that you simply take certain people out of circulation even before they commit a crime. Philipp Kedik wrote a nice short story about this, made famous by Steven Spielberg's film adaptation, Minority Report. It's a society in which murders no longer take place because they are preemptively detected. It sounds utopian, but it's really a dystopia, because people who are innocent, who haven't committed a crime, are taken out of circulation, so to speak. These problems are no longer simply science fiction, they are, cue racial bias of algorithms, they are to some extent already reality. In other words, we are now dealing at various levels in our highly developed complex, technologically complex society with phenomena that in a certain sense indicate a change in time, namely a time coming toward us from the future, a time in which the present is controlled from the future. And this strange science fiction time, but which is becoming partly real. That is, again a keyword hyperstition, fictions, assumptions, imagination of the future, which become real in the present. In addition, there is an extreme amount of experiential potential, an extreme amount of artistic, musical explorations in ethnofuturisms, from which one can learn a great deal. So that would be one or two examples of fictions becoming real. Think also of our everyday political life. Things happen where 5 years ago or 10 years ago you would have said, no way, that's an invention, that's a fiction, something like that can't happen, something like that can't become real. And the second aspect is that time no longer develops in a linear fashion, which does not mean that it simply goes round in circles and that no progress is possible, but that it simply functions differently, that progress must possibly be thought of differently and that progressiveness must be thought of differently in political and cultural terms. These are all things that we in the West find difficult to think about according to a sort of traditional, linear model of progress. And now looking at your opening question and this equation that I mentioned, which is modernity equals progressive, equals capitalist, equals acceleration, that unfortunately, I would say, establishes that progress is only thought of in a certain way, which is only linear, only capitalist, and so on. That the necessity is that one gets out of this bad dialectic, out of this compulsive opposition, on the one hand a western, linear thought, patriarchal progress at the expense of nature, at the expense of other cultures, versus the abandonment of any concept of progress, the abandonment, so to speak, or renunciation of technologies, the transfiguration, so to speak, of the authentic, the natural and so on. This either-or, in this impasse we stand and stand also quite a lot of left theories and left parties and left movements. Accelerationism, feminist or xenofeminism, black accelerationism or Afrofuturism, these ethnofuturisms, they give us clues as to how to think differently and not by chance, so to speak, they are each connoted or have their starting point in each case from subject positions that are not white and male. I find that with hyperstition a very interesting point, that one basically says, okay, we imagine the future and think out of the future into the present and thereby the present is also concretely influenced. In relation to this algorithmic form of calculating the future or this shift in temporality, I always have to think of Big Data, where ultimately, say, the future is extrapolated from existing data. That is, actually, from past events or occurrences. And I ask myself whether that doesn't mean that ultimately the future is unnecessarily narrowed, because the contingency of the future, that it could also have been different, can basically not be included on the basis of such a procedure, because one, say, only thinks on the basis of what already exists. Yes, I have heard that similarly, but I would agree with you or sharpen that. So it's not just that the future or the present are narrowed, but they are robbed of their potential for change. So now philosophically speaking, that's not just on me. What we're seeing here is a conflation or an identification of what a present future is with a future present. That means that certain assumptions that I make now in the present about the future, what will happen tomorrow, are not identical with what tomorrow's present is, that is, the future present. What we're dealing with with Big Data phenomena unfortunately often, or tends to be more and more, is a fixing of the present from the future. It's not just simply, as you said, that algorithmic computation is affecting the present. In part, it is more of a fixation. Think also of economics, think of derivatives. It's not just like taking a loan and saying, well, if I take a loan, I'm committing to it, but I already have an apartment now, that influences. In this, the present and the future influence each other in a certain way. We've known that for a while, but there, both the present and the future have a certain openness, so to speak. With derivative contracts, it is often the case that a certain fixed, an assumption about the future sets the price in the present, without any mobility. The example of preemptive policing that I gave earlier is a very extreme one, where you can see this again. There is also pre-emptive warfare, which claims to be pre-emptive, but is in fact pre-emptive. That is, actually the phenomena that it produces in the first place that it claims to be acting against. The best example of this is the War on Terror, the war on terror. With every bombing in the Middle East, the winter terrorist offspring are produced in the first place. That is to say, I am interested in all these preemption phenomena because they stand as indications of a confusion of our time displacement. For a confusion or one could say polemically pointed, for a turning of the time. My thesis here is that we really live in a fundamentally new time, which is not only, as is always the case, yes times change and so much is new, but really that time itself must be understood in a new way, because it has turned its direction, to speak figuratively. Is it possible to turn this around, or is this what you mean by hypostasis, is it possible to turn this around into a positive direction, because why should it only go in this direction, why should it only be possible to produce such terrible things as war and destruction by putting them into the world preemptively, so to speak. Is that what you mean by hypostition, that you say, okay we imagine other futures, but which we say are more desirable and try to make them come true quasi then say in a self-fulfilling prophecy quasi then? Yes, the challenge within this time model I have outlined is how we deal in a progressive way with this temporality, with this speculative time coming towards us from the future, which we have so far only known in its, now the word has to be used, neoliberal conditioning. What I see, so to speak, among many colleagues, but also political activists, is that although there is a sensorium for these developments, for example for a speculative economy, for the derivative economy, for the developments in the Internet, Big Data and so on, that the reaction to it is simply, that's bad, that's evil. My approach, it's accelerationist in the classical sense, it's more to say, it's not about adopting these technologies. Nor can it be a matter of returning to an authentic economy, where people once again happily stand modernistically on the assembly line and where working hours once again help determine the value of products and whatever the fantasies of authentic work might be, or returning to manual labor or whatever, but the point must be what do we learn from the fact that this derivative economy is possible, or the keyword is financialization, that money, so to speak, multiplies itself. Do we want to go back to an industrial society, do we want to go back to a pre-industrial society or do we accept that we live in a post-industrial society and that also means, do we accept the challenges to develop that in a progressive way. How do we deal with the upcoming robotization, automation processes in our working world?
   By burying our heads in the sand, as official policy does, and saying full employment, working longer, later retirement and there will be full employment again. That is a sure guarantee, so to speak, of growing xenophobia and anti-migration and so on. Why don't we embrace these technological developments, whether that's Big Data, speculative economics or automation, and realize, we don't even live in the capitalism anymore that we grew up in, in my case in 80s, 90s. Possibly, as I said, we are already in a post-capitalist society, in what I would rather call financial Fordalism. And the challenge is both politically and philosophically, philosophically of time, to understand how we deal with this new time. What is no longer possible, so to speak, is to retreat and to return and to phase to the present. We live in the complex, we lie in my diction in time-complex societies and that means that this is no longer just the present, that is, the dimension of time that is closest to us humans, our perceptual and thinking apparatus. We always think from the present, we feel from the present, we anchor ourselves in the present, we design ourselves from the present. This is natural for us under quotation marks. But in complex societies that are increasingly shaped by Big Data, by computers, by algorithms, and so on, we simply no longer set the tone with our beautiful present, or we set it less and less. Not that we are already marginal, but we are one player among many, and that is why so many fantasies of deceleration, which are sprouting up like mushrooms, so to speak, in philosophy, but also in politics, in the wellness sector, in the organic sector, are of course not taking hold. These are, so to speak, prosperity phenomena, which try, so to speak, with meditation and carrot plants to find again to a calm present and to jump out of these contemporary, difficult economic conditions, so to speak. That doesn't work. My plea, the accelerationist plea is rather to say, let's accept this modernity. Keyword Facebook. Why aren't we using Facebook or the Facebook algorithm, that's updated daily, to connect better, to connect better with others? Why does all the affective, but also intellectual work that we stuff into social media every day, why does it not benefit us or a better society, but some shareholders, wherever they sit? Why are these technological platforms, which are very interesting, such as Uber, why do they not benefit the people who work there or who use them, but only those who programmed them, so to speak, or not even them, but the shareholders who invested in them with some kind of venture capital because they have too much money and can afford it because they don't pay taxes? That's the basic question, so to speak, and of course it's not just a technological question, but a techno-political question that must always intertwine the technological and political dimensions. I would absolutely agree with that. What could be concrete starting points for initiating this kind of transformation process? Because there are certainly powerful players, I would say, who also have a vested interest in keeping the current functional logic going. I find it difficult to give a list of concrete phenomena where these new technologies are already being used in a progressive way. Technology is never either positive or negative. It's not neutral either, it's about how you use it in each individual area. It's easiest in the field of medicine. We don't want to wait until we are sick. Of course we will use that in the future, it will be unavoidable that people will let their curiosity, whether their genetic potentials or their basic genetic makeup will be examined and see, possibly I will have this cancer, let me get treated there now before that occurs and so on. So these assessments of machines, of algorithms about the future will and should also and can and may also have an effect on the present. I have now given the example of medicine, just to say, to underline that again, it is not pro contra, it is just in each individual field about how to reprogram them, so to speak, and use them in a progressive way. I have already mentioned various phenomena or areas. It's also a danger that philosophers are then brought in as know-it-all. I am not an expert on the subject of derivative economics. I have published a booklet on the subject, but it is no longer a special field, nor is the subject of robotization a special field, nor is the subject of proactive medicine or preemptive medicine. I'm interested in these time phenomena, I'm interested in ethnofuturisms, I'm interested in these intricate futuristic models in our economy as well, so to speak. I try to find terms for this and I try, so to speak, to transform the field in which I myself work, or to define it differently, what it means to think, to write books, to produce philosophy, to produce philosophical texts. At a time when this no longer necessarily takes place at the Sorbonne or at venerable philosophical faculties. But I've given so many examples now, I've almost exaggerated that a little bit, I also want to resist a little bit from being able to offer panaceas now, to say this is good and this movement is progressive and so on. I just gave examples to make it a bit more vivid, what it might mean to deal with this new speculative time in an accelerationist way, as I think the ethnofuturisms do in part in a very interesting way. They definitely do. Lastly, the question, when you imagine the future, Mr. Abanesian, what makes you feel joyful? So that's really difficult in the face of climate change and the impending humanitarian political catastrophes that are to be feared that kind of go in with it, so growth in migration flows and the reaction, so climate refugees and the reaction to that that we're seeing the beginnings of now, so the shift to the right in almost all of our societies or countries. That's difficult, so to look positively into the future in the face of that. What is positive for me are the technological changes, the constantly new intellectual fields of activity, philosophical challenges that are connected with that, the relationship between philosophy, science, politics, economy, art, culture, which is, after all, changing radically. Or has changed radically in the last ten years, I think, and is about to change further. So life and the political situation, also I say full of challenges, is an extremely exciting time. But as I've been dealing more and more with climate issues lately, I'm now sort of, you got me on the wrong foot when it comes to topic of positive future vision. So the question is, how do we prepare ourselves, so to speak, in a semi-progressive way for the fact that all attempts to still slow down climate change are doomed to failure or would be, even if we were to address them radically now, and if these processes become self-sustaining in how we deal with them. That is once again a bit of a thread now from my answers, that is once again a question of how we deal with these future models. Do we as a species manage to integrate exponential developments in our actions or are we just too stupid for it? Can we really integrate certain future scenarios into our political action? Do we really manage anew to let political subjects into our polis, into our democracy? For me, this means not only preparing our society for refugees, so to speak, including the refugees who come to us through our guilt, through our climate policy, but also managing to give future generations who are not yet alive, who cannot or are not yet allowed to speak, a word and to include them in our political action today. These are, so to speak, questions that each time renegotiate the question of the future in the present and bring with them a truly radical challenge for our political self-understanding, for our understanding of democracy. Mr. Vanessian, thank you very much for the interview. Thank you for the questions. That's Future Histories for today. Thank you very much for listening. Find show notes and more at www.futurehistories.today. Join the discussion on Twitter under the hashtag Future Histories or on Reddit. Let me know what you think about it all and how you liked this episode here. Be sure to rate well on any podcast platforms you use. For our Patreon supporters, there is a lot of additional material on www.patreon.com slash future histories. For example, every month I read in a text that fits the respective topic. So you can drop by there, too. See you next time. I am looking forward to it!

Episode Keywords:

#ArmenAvanessian, #JanGroos, #FutureHistories, #Interview, #Zukunft, #Akzelerationismus #Ethnofuturismus, #Ethnofuturismen, #Akzeleration, #DasAkzelerationistischeManifest, #InventingTheFuture, #NickLand