# FH Complete S02E50 - Simon Denny on Tech-Imaginaries | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Groß and it is my great pleasure to welcome Simon Denny in today's episode. Simon is an artist and professor for time-based media at the HFBK Hamburg. This episode came together as part of the extended exhibition program of the double exhibition by Simon Denny and Agnieszka Kurant at Kunstverein Hannover. And I want to say thanks to Christoph Platzgalus, director of the Kunstverein, for making this possible and to Sarah Morais dos Santos-Brus for connecting me to Christoph. This has been a great pleasure and I really enjoyed talking to Simon, I have to say. Before we start, I want to welcome Max as a Patreon of Future Histories and now please enjoy today's episode with Simon Denny. Welcome Simon. Thank you very much Jan, it's a pleasure to be here. Pleasure to have you. Simon, in your work you often investigate different tech imaginaries and the related cultures as well, but let's start with a focus on the imaginary specifically. What is it that you're investigating when looking at these tech imaginaries, which arguably are not only tech imaginaries, but also always already political imaginaries and economic imaginaries as well? Well, thanks for the question. And I think it's one that I think I constantly revisit. I think I started working on this rather intuitively quite a long time ago. So I grew up in New Zealand and I moved to Germany where I now live and work around 2007 and I went to an art school in Frankfurt there, the Städelschule, which is connected to the Städel Museum. And at that time I already had a practice of sorts. It was my kind of second degree. I'd already started a gallery and had many peers and interests as an artist. But one major thing that hit that year was the iPhone and I guess also the scaling of infrastructure like Facebook. And I just found as somebody who was moving from one community to another, from one locale to another, suddenly the importance of my personal tech stack became very important to me. It was a communication device, a learning device. These interfaces just took over my experience. And at the same time I was around artists who were looking back to the history of how contemporary artists have often, during modernism being, making work which was sort of dealing with the experience or the feeling of technologies as they hit life. So even early 20th century or late 19th century artists were making work about how technology feels and often in the face of new technological consumer environments and paradigms. And so I was thinking about people like working in futurism data around the First World War and I was thinking also about mid-century people encountering television and different types of broadcast environments. So there were a lot of art being made trying to process what these things felt like. And I guess with the onset of mobile and web to social platforms and user generated content and all of that, I realized that there was another major thing going on and a toolkit to be able to kind of process that culturally. But I sort of realized that intuitively because I was just involved in all these things. And I realized also that the conversations that I had among my peers were as much informed by art history and what artists were making as they were by new software and communication strategies that were being shared as a kind of a platform. So yeah, long story short, I started focusing more and more on who was telling those stories and who was making those platforms because it seemed to be quite important for what they were. And so I started to go to technology conferences as well as art events. And I started to speak to and seek out technology founders and listen to their stories and ways of understanding the world culturally and try to kind of process that aesthetically and visually and but also politically. And yeah, so I guess that's what started me on this path of looking to technological imaginaries or tech imaginaries as ease to understanding contemporary experience and then trying to place that as or process that as art experiences that made sense with the history of how artists have interfaced with these things in the past. Is that your question? Yeah, it does. Maybe you could give us an example of one of your works where you specifically try to aim at these imaginaries. Yeah, so I think the first one that I really remember that I felt really worked was a show that I produced in Munich in 2012-13. So I went to a technology conference, which is quite well known in this part of the world, the DLD, Digital Life Design. It's put on by Voodoo Media and it's been going since I think about 2005 or 2006 and has often had kind of major technology founders, particularly from the US and Europe, but only also from Asia and different parts of the world as well, come through on their way to Davos. It happens a few days before Davos and they come and often people that organize it were able to capture founders at the moments when their products were really scaling. So Mark Zuckerberg was there at the moment when Facebook was just getting user numbers that were breaking the records and scaling. And so the year that I sort of first encountered this was 2012-13. And I was given a bunch of the material that recorded all of the conversations that were happening that year and Jack Dorsey was there, Jimmy Wales was there, Pavel Durov was there, among many other people, Drew Houston. So founders of Twitter, Dropbox, Wikipedia, Telegram, etc. Prior to Telegram, it was Vcontact back then. But yeah, so a number of tech founders basically telling their peers what their vision was for the world and what they saw the world as and what their business and technological toolkit for capturing and exploiting that was going to be. And I found that event really moving. I found it very affecting. I was really, I'd never been in an environment like that before. And I found it overwhelming and challenging and inspiring at the same time. So I was sort of confused, but I had very strong actions to it. And then I worked on an artwork that kind of transcribed and took quotes from that process, from those conversations and put them alongside contemporary interface design and printed a bunch of graphic panels that were sort of summaries of each talk. And then made a kind of a maze in a space called the Munich Kunstverein, where, you know, viewers would walk in a sort of a 3D extension-like environment, like you would if you were stuck in iron, and then be confronted with all of these bombardments of statements and quips about the world and about where technology was going to take us. So that was kind of the first time I did that, that piece then toured to the U.S. and to New Zealand and to Mini Pinale and other types of things. And I think that's when I really found my way of, you know, taking really seriously the propositions of business and technology thinkers as keys to understanding culture in our world today. Let's maybe dig a little bit deeper into this emotional aspect, because this is very interesting to me. And I'm wondering whether one might maybe connect it to the question of aesthetics in the sense of maybe an aesthetics of imagination, because I mean, of course, aesthetics plays a huge role in all of this. You know, it's on the level of technological artifacts. It's on the level of the performance on the stage of these conferences. It's, for example, meme culture, like being picked up in the blockchain space, stuff like that. But it's also on the level of imagination as well, I would say, because these imaginations of future, they have to be kind of aesthetically coherent. They have to be desirable, so to speak. So there is kind of a realm of treating our imagination of alternative futures as if it was a design space, you know? So, I mean, they themselves might even not be aware of that. But there is this question that you have to address, because if you do not address it, people won't kind of pick up on it. You know, it has to be aesthetic and it has to be desirable or it has to be aesthetic in order to become desirable. So this is really interesting to me because it also points towards a certain effort that we will have to engage with if we think about alternatives as well. So I would be interested in your thoughts about this. Yeah, I mean, in my experience, these types of, you know, the more I looked into exactly this question of, you know, was this a design space? And if it was, how deliberate a design space is it? And how are those who are in charge of producing future technological consumer paradigms? How much do they think about the design space of the imaginaries of their potential clients, which is everybody everywhere all at once, you know? And I would say in my experience, it's quite explicit. And quite, you know, I learned more and more just how rich and imaginary these people draw on. I mean, it's in one way culturally specific and often quite politically specific. It's often coming from a broadly speaking conservative view frame of the world. And some are quite conservative, tending towards quite right wing ideas of what politics should be, but not always. But it's also culturally specific, right? I guess again, as somebody growing up in New Zealand, I'm very aware of the histories of colonialism and the fact that I come from a history of certainly colonialism. I'm a white New Zealander. And, you know, I grew up among a very awkward understanding of the fact that my forefathers had come and essentially expropriated a bunch of land and, you know, exported an idea of politics and culture and resources and, you know, whatever capitalism onto a space that prior to that was governed by different people in different ways with different values. And, you know, so I guess I was aware of the fact that when these imaginaries were coming from California and were framed from a bunch of people that looked like me, that it was again a very culturally specific vision that was being exported and that felt familiar. And, yeah, also, maybe I'm getting ahead of myself, but connected to other types of things that I've been looking at culturally in the world anyway. You know, I think the art world, especially New Zealand when I grew up there, but also in many other places around the world was thinking exactly about these things about which cultural voices had scale and which were important for imaginaries of culture and political imaginaries and all these other things. So, yeah, I guess they all kind of connected in my mind. But, yeah, I mean, even if you just look at Apple, right, you want one of the economical technology companies of the past 50 years. The, you know, the design thinking thing that is centric to them is obviously understood as a huge part of why they think they themselves are successful, right? The mythologizing of Johnny Ive and these types of, you know, design focused, aesthetics focused, product design, simplicity, drawing on the history of modernism, all of that is, I think, everybody in that world understands that to be one of the key things of why Apple is so hedonic. So, yeah, that's one example, but I think there's other examples as well, also from different parts of the, or slightly different parts of the political spectrum. You know, one of the kind of key arcs of my investigation for the last few years has also been into the political universe around PayPal, Founders Fund, Peter Thiel. And that's a slightly different, I think, political imaginary than the one that surrounds Apple. Obviously, there's a lot of similarities as well, but I think there's a different ideological design space there that is aesthetic in a different way, right? It's not drawing on the same strands of modernism that Apple is, but it is drawing on frontier imaginaries. It is drawing on, you know, IQ and, you know, race science and things like that really explicitly at different moments in its expression. So, yeah, I don't know if, again, that's an answer, but I think all of the very powerful people who are at the center of those projects really think a lot about designing inventories in the heads of their clients, users, publics. So you would say this is very much deliberate on their part, so you would say that somebody... That's my opinion. Interesting. That's my experience. So you would say that someone like Peter Thiel, for example, you know, not only kind of has an ideological foundation that he builds his kind of worldview upon and then tries to bring this into the world and into actually being through force by capital, so to speak. But that he kind of reflects upon this aspect of narrative in a, let's say, aesthetic or design frame, so to speak. That's my understanding. And I don't think I'm alone in this interpretation of the project. And I think it becomes more and more visible as you get kind of discourses around, you know, pathways through subculture to producing value as well, which is a more recent turn, I think, in that in that milieu, whereby there's explicit projects to build publics within traditionally avant-garde cultural spaces to kind of like seed political imaginaries more explicitly. And again, like, I think I don't want to come across as if I think that, you know, powerful people in California can design the world top down and that they know that that's all possible. I think it's very haphazard at the same time, but I don't think that contradicts the fact that it's I think that's the part of the project. I think that's an explicit part of the design space of the project, right? I think there's many attempts by many companies to do many things in terms of create a culture. I mean, you hear projects a lot talk about community, producing community and community being one of the key things to seed a product, right? If you don't have community, then you don't have a way to scale. And I think that is a, you know, that's a common project across many kind of Silicon Valley-ish things working in that tradition, right? I think most people who are in the space of designing those projects know that they don't always work and there's an amount of luck and haphazardness and synergy. You know, so I don't I don't claim to have the idea that there are kind of people who even very powerful people who are able to sit at the center of thing and completely design it and sort of just press the go button on a Goldberg machine. And suddenly there's a political paradigm or whatever. I don't think they think that and I don't think that's possible. But I do think that explicitly designing imaginaries is a part of producing publics that produce products that are sustained by political paradigms. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Well, and of course, I mean, there are also historical examples where this has been done quite successfully. There's the Montpeleris Society where the neoliberals very early on kind of had a roadmap how to implement these types of ideas into the public sphere and kind of were quite successful in executing their plans as well. So, of course, it's not and these people. Yeah, no, exactly. But and these people are explicit students of those projects. You know, like one of I mean, I've been lucky enough to see, you know, some of these really key actors play into this world a little bit. I was I was a guest at the Montpeleris Society meet up at the Hoover Institution. No shit. 2020 and the keynote speaker was Peter Thiel. And, you know, there's a there's a there's a key there's a there's a real literacy, I think, in certain parts of the communities that make these incredible products and incredible politics and publics that knows what they're drawing on, you know. And at that meeting was incredible. There was also a kind of a show of the Hoover Institution Archive of Milton Friedman's work, which is, again, I think, another really important milestone in this cultural arc. And and also Frigida Kayak's founding of the Montpeleris Society. There was an incredible relic there and I'm very attracted to material relics in my work sculpture and a painter and I work a lot with making exhibitions and making objects as well as making digital things. And there was a really compelling object at that meet up that I'll never forget that I think kind of contains some of the, you know, what we're talking about. There was a kind of a giant tablecloth with the signatories of all of the founders of the Montpeleris Society sewn into it, which is a part of the Hoover Institution's Archive of Hayek's. So, you know, I think, you know, this is this is the world that I find fascinating because these objects I think are just their values, but I think they're slightly undervalued in terms of their role and importance in our kind of cultural world. Very interesting. Very interesting. And what would you say? Because, I mean, there had been a certain roadmap back then when Montpeleris Society was founded. What would you say? What are the shifts that took place? Not really since then, but what are the essential shifts that the generation that is active right now, so to speak, maybe see different and enact differently? I mean, not the least because there are, of course, also different kind of affordances through the technological stack that is now available. And they obviously do use it quite actively, the potential and try to kind of bring it to their use. So how did they shift this perspective? Maybe do they have different types of approaches when they try to imagine the enactment of these imaginaries? I mean, that question, I'm probably not qualified to answer. I mean, I can speculate what I think might be the case, but I don't have concrete answers of the explicit differences. You know, I'm neither an economic historian nor, you know, I'm an artist. Right. So I sort of do embedded projects to try and understand communities and kind of pull out aesthetic moments that capture and reify some of what I think is an important vibe. Right. That's my level of qualification and my kind of what I can actually claim that I do. Right. All of this other stuff around it, this rhetorical material and my speculations on various different business strategies is kind of amateur work. Right. But yeah, I mean, I think to my mind, there would be a very sophisticated understanding of what's possible in terms of where we are with the technology stack at the moment. I think anybody involved in a VC community as influential as Founders Fund or Teal Capital or even Andreessen Horowitz, you know, is an incredible attractor of information of what's possible technologically and what might be possible coming technologically. So I think that that's definitely an important arm of their political apparatus. Let's say if you were building a political project as we think these people might be doing, certainly you would be considering that. And there's definitely very, very good information coming to you first all the time. Right. Because you offer money to found and support these projects as they grow. Right. So that's it. I think that that combination between financial leverage and power translated into an information stream of kind of like a continual updating and evolving of understanding what is possible in terms of communication networks, financial infrastructures, and then possible ramifications of what those are becoming might be. And I think all of that is an incredible tool that people like Hayek and even Friedman probably wouldn't have had access to. Right. So I think there's I think that's also a real difference maybe between, again, from my amateur understanding of the kind of technology founder of yesteryear and the adjacency to politics and the kind of political environment that they might have been operating in the mid 20th century, even an Intel or a, you know, and a kind of a more contemporary figure also like Elon Musk or something like that, who one gets the sense to Elon Musk and these types of actors are maybe sometimes even political and rhetorical first, you know, that's at least my interpretation of it. Right. So I think you could you could argue that a figure like Elon Musk understands as good as anybody else, but possibly better than most people, why Twitter is valuable, and Twitter is a valuable tool rhetorically and politically as much as it is financially, you know, And I think he is an actor that seemingly continually iterates and experiments on how that tool can be deployed to his advantage, both as a businessman, but also as a growing attractor of political power. So, you know, so I don't know if that's on topic or off topic argument, but I think I think the Yeah, the tools and availabilities now compared to, you know, when even in the mid century, so even 50 years after even in the data era, right. When when it's arguable that Mont Pelerin's, you know, labors finally sort of came into mainstream political usage between Thatcher and Reagan, and sometimes explicitly, I'm sure you'll know that Thatcher, you know, really embraced Hayek, you know, also nominal. But, yeah, I think I think that there's a big difference in terms of, of what's possible now, you know, and, yeah. And I mean, there are big differences in terms of what is possible now, not only for them, but hopefully also for us, I would say. So I would be also interested in what could desirable alternatives on this level of abstraction on the level of, let's say, socio-technical imaginaries, and what could they look like, and what would you say how, again, how conscious of an effort it can actually be to develop these imaginaries? Well, yeah, I mean, again, just to situate my answer, again, I'm an artist, not a, not a political thinker. I mean, you know, I think about politics, but I'm not a, I don't design policy. I'm not in dialogue with people that, you know, spend all their time and, you know, become very well informed about what may or may not work. You know, so, so just to qualify my answer, but I'm sure it's possible to imagine using these types of environments and apparatuses to different political ends. It must be logically possible, right? I think the difficulty with that seems to be, to me, that a part of all of that is, is also centralized power and leverage. That it's hard to replicate, right? And this is, this has, I guess, synergies and rhymes with conversations around AI, you know, again, as I pay attention to various different conversations that surround various different technologies. We are now in a, in a hype cycle that focuses on the promise of AI, but one of the qualifiers that always comes with that, and I think you see that in terms of spending and resource allocation and personnel decisions, everything that's affecting the technology community right now, that, you know, very few, very big actors are really at the center of being able to deploy these tools. And I think that's somewhat true with the world of political imaginaries and arms of technology that I was describing as well, you know, so while I hope that there's ways that people who have different politics could get access to those design spaces. I think it's a formidable task to overcome centralized power like that, as it's, as it's become centralized, you know, where I got excited again, as a, as a kind of cultural lightning rod and and rare fire along the way all of these stories was was around crypto. And I spent quite a lot of time as crypto emerged, thinking and being excited about the fact that alternative financial power structures were being explicitly designed. And with them, there were various rhetorical and ideological spaces also emerging. I enjoyed seeing a full political spectrum of those emerging around blockchains. So I saw right libertarianism, of course, heap various different visions on top of those infrastructures and thrive. But I also saw really interesting people come out of activism from the left emerge from protest movements from the, you know, mid 2000s, like, like Occupy people coming from those types of histories also attracted to designing through blockchains through the idea that designable money spaces might, you know, open up different political opportunities. We're at a moment in the hype cycle in the blockchain story and the political imagination surrounding the blockchain story, which is quite low. There's a lot of pessimism. And I think that's got a lot to do with the fact that there's been many scammers and actors exposed new new technological spaces always have potential upsides for incredible amounts of arbitrage. And this is often where people accrue power at the beginnings of those new technological paradigm deployments. And yeah, and with that becomes a kind of gray, gray area legally that people often try and capture the surplus from think Airbnb and Uber and very kind of banal versions, right? Things that were sort of not quite legal suddenly became an opportunity to capture a whole huge market sector. And therefore a power base. And I think in blockchains, there was a huge amount of possibilities for that and a really long period of time when it was a gray market and it still kind of is even what's firming up right now. You know, certainly this is this allowed for the growth of DeFi and all these other kind of projects and yeah, and huge opportunities for scammers, which are now kind of meeting regulation as as the world of financial regulation catches up with catches up with those projects. A lot of yeah, a lot of disappointing stories come out of the blockchain space and therefore make it less of an attractive space for political narratives as well at the moment. But let's see, maybe maybe things could could change along that environment as well. I want to dig a little bit deeper into this question of the recent history. But before that, just because you like now a second time try to situate rightly. So try to situate your answer and and pointed out that you are quote unquote, just an artist. For me, that's that's one of the reasons why I ask you these specific questions around aesthetics of imagination and stuff like that. And of course, because you very much engage with these imaginaries in your work in general, before we move on to digging a little deeper into this recent history, I just wanted to dig a little bit deeper into this question of alternative imaginary still, because I mean, One question would also be that coming from your like deep engagement with the existing socio-technical imaginaries. Do you think there are certain maybe leverage points or certain fields that can and should be addressed by any alternative socio-technical imaginary in order to maybe also become as desirable, you know, to kind of put it back to this question of that it needs to be desirable, you know, because I more and more come to the conclusion that this is like really, really, really crucial. You know, because within future histories, for example, I very much engage with this question of democratic planning and how this could be brought about. I engage with these different models and so on. And of course, this is all important. And the theory behind these models is important, too. But I oftentimes get to this point where I think, oh, wait a second. I mean, of course, it's important to have a theoretical discussion about this. But this construction of alternative imaginaries in relation to desires is even as important as this theoretical discussion about, you know, comprehensive models of democratic planning. So do you think that there are certain, how do you say, Hebel? You speak German? Do you speak German? Certain leverage points. Yeah, certain leverage points to go about this task, you know? Yeah, I mean, I think there are. And I think that's a fair question. And I think that actually oftentimes, you know, these very intelligent thinkers that we've been referring to before that have been in charge of very successful products see these spaces and develop them really effectively. Right. And so I think message boards in the 90s and the 2000s were kind of cedars of potential possibilities for politics and culture. And I think that in those imaginaries were born possibilities that played out culturally, right, that started with culture first and then kind of, or started with a particular, I don't want to be determinist in where things begin. Maybe that's the wrong way to put it. But I think that certainly, you know, certain moments have been recognized to kind of coalesce certain politics, right? So let's say to put a concrete name on it, let's say that there was a kind of a conservative meme factory produced within 4chan, right? Let's make it simple like that. And that was a combination of a cultural force and a technological paradigm. And various people on the left also recognize that that was happening, particularly in the Trump run up to the Trump era and how important that felt culturally during that era of his first run to presidency. I remember a lot of conversations and analysis going into why 4chan was able to produce, you know, Trump supporting memes and political narratives. And I think that those same communities seem to be popping up in avant-garde art adjacent and cultural adjacent circles now and funding small offline communities and pumping quite a lot of resources and space into those situations and glamour. And I think that part of the apparatus of what art can produce is sort of some kind of synthesis of money, glamour and seeding ideas through events and small communities that then kind of scale into larger conversations and often take place in geographical centers of money in certain parts of our empire, let's say. And I don't see as much of that same recognition of that power being as organized in circles around the left. So I think there would be an opportunity there for getting money and resources together and kind of seeding political spaces that are adjacent to art and glamour in the way that those spaces are. And I think a lot of the actors that, you know, I'm also a teacher in art school, so I see the beginnings of some of these conversations. It's very normal for art school students to band together and produce very authentic, interesting, exciting, glamorous young spaces. But those spaces often, especially today, are running away from running out of money sources. And I think from the kind of political sector and the political left, there used to be a lot more, especially in Europe, available to support these structures. I think in Germany, it's still done a pretty good job of doing that. But I know in other parts of the Anglosphere, it's definitely not as easy to do these things as it used to be. And those things used to seed, I think, important political things. And it was a space for starting ideas and creating the kind of momentum necessary to scale ideas very organically. I'm sure you know the term, again, from the kind of chat room world of the idea of force memeing, right? The idea that a meme can't be designed top down. It has to be a bottom up experience and something about architecture and the personnel that went into producing memes in 4chan that really scaled was a special piece of magic that was very, very hard to reproduce in other types of environments. Even if somebody put the kind of seemingly the same ingredients together, it didn't often produce the same stickiness and scale. And I think that that's also true with kind of culture. You can't sort of top down force meme avant-garde art either. It sort of has to be a bottom up experience that then gets kind of picked up at the right time with the right amplifiers. And there's a very special, I think, set of expertise that art schools and the adjacent spaces and kind of arts council funding type arrangements are able to produce and have produced very effectively in the last 50 to 100 years in Britain, America, and New Zealand, these cultures that I'm really familiar with, and also in Germany. So I think that could be an opportunity that is now being exploited by people on the more conservative end of things very explicitly that could be reinvested in by people of other politics. Okay, and then maybe let's bring these two elements together and take another look at this question of recent history when it comes to this relation of the left and tech. Because, I mean, one way to put it might be, or at least of the recent history, you might say that, okay, there was this like 2014, 15 moment where you had this accelerationist manifesto by Srenichek and Williams. You had their book, then afterwards, Inventing the Future, you had the xenofeminist manifesto, Falk, so fully automated luxury communism floated around at this time also. So all of these things kind of popped up trying to maybe renegotiate this question of technology and the left. So there was this, and then I guess some of the kind of cryptosphere, the blockchain space, I would say, maybe leached upon this energy. Some of the energy that came out of this, I would say, also kind of went into the blockchain sphere in this, as you already pointed towards an enthusiasm around, for example, DAOs and stuff like that. And I, for one, remain a little skeptical whether or not this did the whole thing really a favor or not. But apart from this question, whether or not the cryptosphere was leaching parts of this energy, I would say that there's also arguably another aspect to this accelerationist moment that kind of takes apart in why it has to be rethought, I would say. And this is the more or less, not completely, but more or less unreflected or, let's say, not sufficiently reflected inherent problems with Promethean progressivism, so to speak. So I would say, of course, the accelerationists had some valid points when it comes to what they called folk politics, so to speak. Then on the other side, again, I think, for example, the question of ecology or the ecological question kind of is a crystallization point, also for why this kind of Promethean progressivism in its kind of unreflected form also cannot lead to sufficient answers, so to speak. So this might be a way to frame the very recent history, so to speak. And I would be interested whether either you agree with this framing and then what do you think, what's the point where we are at right now? I think you already kind of pointed towards this aspect that AI, because of the way that the infrastructure is built, kind of has a tendency or a strong tendency towards centralization, and that's an aspect of it. But maybe you could elaborate a bit more on what you think is the point where we are at right now when it comes to this question of the left and tech. Yeah, again, I'll make a stab at it from my armchair. I'm going to say this 10 times on this podcast, but my primary project is producing fantastic artworks. That's what I spend most of my time trying to do. And I feel that a part of that project is informing myself as best as I can about politics and aesthetics and all these things. So I have kind of opinions, but this is not what I put my primary energy into understanding. I try to put all that energy into what makes a great artwork and a great art experience. But having said that disclaimer, I've been really interested in this flow of energy, maybe from accelerationist adjacent things coming from a history of CCRU and those types of thinkers. Again, I think it's really interesting how left-right polarities emerge in this context. So if you take that history, again, and standing of it, you have Sadie Plant on the one side and Nick Land on the other. And that's the sort of framework for the political possibilities within accelerationism and its forebearer. And yeah, I guess with Mark Fisher in the middle. So I think that was the background that I understood accelerationism to be emerging out of. And certainly a group of artists around that as well were kind of interested in Jason and kind of trying to work through the cultural possibilities of that. And that was, I think, broadly what was termed at the time post-internet art actors, which is when I became active and visible also within my own art making. Then crypto, I think, did emerge out of similar communities. And some of the energies and hopes that I saw organizing in the art world around the banner of post-internet and accelerationist thought and questioning it. Often also within art, you have this really productive, I think, space where a lot of things are examined and tried out, even things that one is politically both aligned with and questioning. So you got a sort of a full exploration of the possibilities of those spaces from left to right within art. And I think that was also true and still potentially true within crypto, which is maybe we're at the end of a certain arc. But let's say as the accelerationist question lost its momentum culturally, I think that crypto was becoming more attractive to similar types of people with similar types of questions. Who wanted to look both at the design space of politics and the design space, aesthetics, and then this kind of new foregrounding of the financial design space at the same time. So I think a lot of productive thinking got done around that. And actually there was and still is, I think, a kind of ecological question at the center of that too. Resource questions were always at the center of conversation, certainly from the art perspective around crypto. There was huge debates around whether one could use proof of work or not because it was so energy intensive. And certainly I did a bunch of work that addressed that very directly as well. I found that really compelling. But I had peers alongside me as well that were designing projects that were sort of trying to think about how nature and nature is the wrong word. Let's say non-human actors could interact with markets as a potential space for also designing systems that took into account things that in the, let's say, more mainstream economic world were considered to be externalities. So what if financial things were in dialogue with natural things and those designs could be more synergistic, capturing more of a whole. So I'm thinking about things that happened around project spaces like Trust in Berlin and projects like Terra Zero that were sort of circling around that group of people. They were coming in and out of conversations happening with spaces like Strelka, also kind of design thinking worlds that also interacted with various other art actors at the same time. So I think that was a really productive little moment. And then NFTs as a phenomenon came and blew all that energy apart and sort of confused everybody. Because suddenly there was this, you know, those were all quite modest and small experiments that were happening with crypto and DOWs and stuff prior to 2021 when NFT explosion kind of like took over everybody's attention space. And suddenly there was this sort of casino aspect in there that had been backgrounded that sort of hadn't really been the most important thing for those people who were interested in that design space up until that moment. But then suddenly certain people saw access to capital that they'd never imagined. And I think started to design, you know, products in different ways that sort of addressed value capture financially, much more explicitly. And again, I wouldn't personally describe that as a corruption, but it certainly shifted the focus to value capture and business design. And, you know, again, things that I think are really important actually to solving anything because you can't go on organizing with goodwill alone and the kind of hours that youth allows dries up as one gets older. And, you know, you need more resources to produce thinking and remain sustainable. So, again, I don't think that was a part of the puzzle, but I do think it took some of the narrative emphasis out of some of the more adventurous designing between money, resources and non-human actors and all these kind of urgent questions. And then AI, I think, again, we were at another moment where the recent hype cycle in AI, certainly in the art world, is spurred by access to text to image prompt, consumer facing goods. You know, the AI systems that produce them have been there for a long time, and there's been really productive questions also being asked by various artists around what's possible with AI and what isn't. Also from the political left explicitly. But then suddenly you have all these kind of image prompt things which again sort of produce a Cambrian explosion of potential possibilities that has a kind of hype and energy cycle into it. But, you know, I was in touch with some of the people that were founding the Mid Journey project, and there were artists very close to the beginning of that project. So David, the founder, had a group of people who were very art adjacent around him as he was doing the first iterations of that engine. And, you know, I designed an NFT project with one of the founders of CryptoKitties called DotCom Seance, which used very early algorithms that weren't Mid Journey but were kind of adjacent to that before Mid Journey existed with the same community of people. And I know other artists like John Raffman also were there trying out things at the same time, so this is again the same kind of community of people that I've been talking about for the longer time. But then when that becomes a kind of hit product, I think, you know, immediately voices like ours became less interesting to David than other people around him designing business models which were more, you know, about value capture and scale. So I think at the moment, there are AI and ownership adjacent conversations which I think are really interesting that are happening from this community. I'm thinking explicitly of Matt Dryhurst and Holly Herndon's project Spawning that they're building, which is about ownership and training sets and trying to define more explicit spaces for artists ownership and royalties associated with being a part of various training sets. I think that's really interesting. I mean, again, I don't know if I would put that on a left right spectrum, but I think it's about the small actor having agency and centralized systems. So I think that could be could be could be left Jason. And so that's where I think that's happening. But I think also AI is a harder thing to become a part of than crypto was for a small actor because because of the centralized nature of the of the technology. So you can build on top of centralized systems, but it's not the same thing as starting your own protocol or becoming part of a core group of Ethereum devs. You know, these things were just more open culturally and and and and actively, you know, and I was very lucky to be around a Berlin and around a cultural balloon that was adjacent to the flowering of Ethereum's possibilities at the times. And it was whatever you think of the Ethereum project now. And and and there is a real spectrum of political possibilities, I think, in the Ethereum community, some which are very right libertarian and some which are much more left adjacent. But at least those spaces are open. You can walk into those rooms. You can, you know, if you're if you're if you're in those circles, they're approachable and and somewhat understandable. And I think, yeah, for me, the adjacency to AI is so much more distant. I mean, what always struck me with the crypto sphere and the imaginaries that are that were coming out of that and even the imaginaries that were developed in a more like left leaning spectrum, which I guess is one that you're also engaging with. I mean, there's a certain type of pre-configuration going on, which is that the way in which these imaginaries are built is always on top of a layer that is kind of strictly transactional. You know, so the because that's kind of built in to these infrastructures. It's it's at the end, the tools that they try to employ for building, I don't know, a left utopian dowel or whatever, you know, the tools are framed within a framework that is strictly transactional. And that at the end kind of has a certain tool set, which is in most of the time can be and I'm being polemic here, but can be kind of boiled down to monetary incentive structures that that they try to employ in order to get people to do whatever. And that's a certain type of way of relating to things, to people, to more than human nature, to whatever, you know. And if you limit yourself in such a fashion, then this is already a very, very, very narrow corridor within which you think about these alternatives. And this is this was really very irritating to me, I have to say, when when interacting with these types of projects. And and but then within this narrow corridor, of course, the people are very enthusiastic, very also kind of honestly trying to do things differently. But I'm looking at it and I'm thinking, yeah, it's already flawed. I could imagine a lot of the actors that I was in contact with during this period could relate very well to that analysis. So I think that it's a it's a it's a wall that a number of people I know found themselves up against and found to be limiting. Yeah, but then but then if we stick to this small description of recent history and we had, you know, this explorationist energy kind of going into parts of the crypto sphere. And now we get to this point where we have this critique where with this obviously is a corridor that is framed way too narrowly. Then what's where do we go from here? You know, and then and you also pointed out that the AI thing is kind of too difficult to get into. But it doesn't mean that it's not only right now. Yeah, yeah, no. But but the question would be where you know that there must be other roads to go as well. You know, that's not it's not just AI or, you know, the dead end of incentivation through through crypto tokens or whatever. You know, there are other ways as well. Do you have any feeling or any are there any sparks that you can see that point towards different directions? I mean, my, you know, my flannery, or if that's a that's a word, you know, position that that I have right has always been trying to come to things where I see emerging possibilities happening and sort of figuring out what's going on culturally and trying to reify that into something that makes sense and within my idiom. And and I've seen a few hype cycles come and go. Right. And I think we certainly are at a low point in the crypto hype cycle where very few possibilities are seen. Some some very few possibilities are seen because of what you said that the design space is so specifically interest that there is no alternative possible to build on those foundations. That would be one bottoming out of a hype cycle. Hope world for certain actors. Right. And I think that often when you reach a trough like that, it's quiet for a few months. And then there's another moment where suddenly somebody sees something in that design space that can alter that that can be something different. And I'm never the person that or my role is not to spawn these moments or to to start them. But it's more to be listening close enough to to notice them as they emerge. Right now, I'm not sure where that's going to come from. But but we're not at the end of history yet. And and I'm sure there will be moments of possibility. And I think often in the past, these spaces have opened up in very surprising ways. You know, so again, like, I don't think anybody making art on blockchains saw NFTs coming as a paradigm shift. Nobody, you know, and there were many people frustratedly trying to find a way to connect. I mean, this is a very narrow design space. Again, it's not the same political macro you're talking about. But in terms of like hype cycles and possibility horizons in imaginaries, I think often it can seem like there's nothing. And then all of a sudden, there's something that changes that perspective. And it's very, very hard to see coming down the road until you're sort of on it. And I'm not on it right now. And I don't know where it's coming down the road. But I imagine there will be a turn which makes a design space and an imaginary space possible, you know, if that gives you an answer. Yeah, yeah. And I just wanted to point out that at least to me, it doesn't seem surprising that NFT came along, I have to say. I mean, not that I could have foreseen it, but it's very coherent, I would say, because I mean, it... Yeah, but everything's coherent in retrospect, right? That's the thing about history. Yeah, well, I mean, that's true. But I mean, it's coherent in the way that... I mean, what blockchains always did was to formalize ownership without formalizing identity. And so there was always a form of kind of focusing on there was a strong emphasis on ownership. And so the idea that this space at some point will bring about kind of the quote unquote ultimate idea of hyper speculative ownership asset is kind of that's why I mean, it's coherent. Makes sense. No, I understand what you're saying. But I mean, I think I also the other part of the answer maybe to your question of like, you know, is there going to be a design space that's possible that's anything to do with crypto or AI that the people who want to build things on the left can engage with in earnest without being defeated before the purpose? I mean, I wonder if that question is so specific to technology, right? Yeah, no, no, no, it's not. Of course. Yeah. Right. But this is what maybe is maybe important from my macro cultural perspective to understand it's maybe not a technical question. That's maybe a question that is broader, because I also don't see anything outside of crypto as a design space, which also doesn't rely on the underpinnings of, of, you know, basically monetarist understanding of, of how power works and how people align and what you know what getting communities together means and what the levers are to, to nudge those is, you know, so it's, yeah, as I say, I think it's not really a technological question, but it's a cultural question that the technology projects that are built and, and built on reflect as well, right? If the technology is a, is a, is a relic of a political environment, again, without being determinist of which comes first, it's unsurprising that the technological stack is in synergy with a general narrative around what possibilities are for design in general, right? Yeah, right, right. And I just want to state clearly that I, of course, also do not think that it's a technological project first, of course, it's a, it's a political project, but I'm specifically interested in this nexus, you know, and I think you are too, somehow, you know, and then, so this is then Maybe we can revisit earlier moments in our conversation, right? We're like, you know, we see where are actors looking for spaces of possibility that have a lot of information available to them, right? And, and again, on the conservative side of things, politically, I see actors investing a lot in, in offline small communities of cultural actors, doing, you know, seeding ideas in a very organic bottom up way. And that is, of course, a social technology, one could frame it like that. So maybe that's a space of possibility for people of different politics as well to invest in, you know, ground level, authentic, small communities of people who have energy and a little bit of glamour around them. Maybe those are technological spaces for invention. You don't have to use the word crypto to describe those, you don't have to use mention AI to describe those spaces. Those are very human cultural technologies. And I think, yeah, if that's a possibility space that is worthy enough for very busy people with a lot of resources to invest their time and energies in cultivating explicitly, then perhaps we can do that in cheaper ways ourselves that don't need that capital, especially if we are the actors indeed producing that value, supposedly, right? So that's where I see the possibility for people that I teach in art that I, you know, I have a mentoring program that I also co founded with a bunch of artists outside of my academic teaching and in the German art school system, called Berlin Program for Artists, which helps artists who are already starting out their journeys into being kind of professional actors. Outside of institutions like schools, and gives them a community to work with. I think that's a very worthwhile, you know, deployment of my personal efforts and capital, the limited amount that I have, you know. So I think, yeah, maybe that's an answer in terms of where possibility is. I mean, I have one question here where you quite surely will have to have a disclaimer again. I'm not sure if I should, but I'll just ask it and we'll see where it takes us. I mean, because there's a certain dead end, so to speak, that I encounter oftentimes in future histories when talking to different people about, yeah, also questions of democratic planning and the like. And since the artwork allows itself a bit more of, I would say, speculative slack, maybe, I thought maybe you encountered interesting approaches around this question. So the dead end comes in when, as I said, thinking about democratic planning. But in relation to a, I would say, relational materialist thinking, meaning that you do want to establish structures of democratic planning, but without falling back into essentialist notions of truth, essentialist notions of the individual, the human individual, the human subject, but instead work towards an expanded notion of what the, what this democratic polis might be, you know, expanding it to include non-human actors. The more than human in general, more than human nature, but also, of course, possibly technological environments and stuff like that. So maybe one could speak of a government of things where things are not thought of only as objects, but from a perspective of relational materialism. So, but this then kind of brings up the question how to, again, maybe design the polis, how to design this space beyond relying on human subjects as its nucleus, you know? So a non, more than human government of things as democracy. What would that look like? And I've asked many different people and I didn't get very far yet. I have some clues, some leads, but I would be interested. What do you think about it? Well, yeah, I'm definitely going to just claim at this run. So again, my role is to synthesize things that I have a reasonable sense of adjacency to and a reasonable sense that I can speak to them meaningfully and, you know, add value in my reification towards at least of capturing an essence of something that I feel able to capture. And this is also where I would come to this question from is that I think a lot of people, maybe like yourself, look for political imaginaries and technological spaces for designing community that outside of what the dominant political fantasies and actualities are. And certainly in the art world and in the cultural space, often, then there's a question of who is designing those spaces and who is in charge of making those decisions. And yeah, you point out, you know, human and non-human actors. There are whole understandings of the world that are old, that include ways of understanding these things that are coming from the culture that is not the people in California that we've been talking about, nor the political theorists that we've been referring to during this conversation, that often come from communities that have been disempowered by these things. Exactly that trajectory of actors, right? So again, I'm going to come back to my upbringing and my geographical understanding of the world, which was from New Zealand. And, you know, Maori and Pacific indigenous communities have been have ways of understanding the world and actors within it. Across human and non-human spaces and, indeed, explicit political and technological paradigms for, you know, working and ordering the world and being an actor in it that works very well for a long time. Prior to the cultural spaces that we occupy, and we are part of antagonizing, right? And I think certainly in the art world, a lot of attention and reallocation of resources is going towards recognizing and trying to grapple with how to include those types of understandings of the world more productively in the way that we see them. In the type of cultural design space that we're occupying and coming from. That's a very carefully worded answer because it's a very tricky space. And I've made my own attempts to come into dialogue with people that know more than me about those ways of understanding technology and understanding the world. I did a big project in New Zealand with a thinker architect that I really admire called Karamia Muller, who comes from a Samoan background, not only, but, you know, her world of expertise is indigenous space, indigenous understandings of space from a Pacific perspective. And we made an exhibition together, a group exhibition together of objects that came both from a crypto design space and a kind of an understanding of a lineage of design from crypto histories. Interestingly, her uncle is Swiss as well as Samoan. There's an interesting colonial history there. And he is also the founder of a very important set of banking infrastructure that was adjacent to the birth of crypto in Switzerland and its interaction with the world mainstream finance. So he was the legal actor that designed the possibilities for the launch of Ethereum in dialogue with Vitalik. And he founded a very important crypto bank called Signum, which a lot of crypto projects use. And, you know, it was really interesting to antagonize that history and put it alongside other Pacific histories and other Pacific adjacent actors thinking about community and design and what agency was in terms of technology, what technology indeed mean, who was able to claim the technological, who was able to design political space, and what power structures meant in that. So this is maybe a more detailed answer than you want, but I do think that those are where people in my community find energy to have conversations that look different from monetary incentive design. But it comes with difficult cultural territory. It comes with an admission and a reckoning with oneself that if you're in that design space, as a white guy like me, you might not be leading that design space, right? You can't just simply appropriate those structures of design and work on top of them as your own. And that involves a different understanding of agency and collaboration than I was certainly used to before I tried to engage in those kinds of conversations. And it leads to conversations that sound very different to the one that you and I have had today with also different pace and a different understanding of where value lies, etc. So I guess maybe my takeaway from that experience and continuing to think in this space is that maybe even the way that you and I are describing design as a part of the problematics that we're encountering that are cultural, technological, political, right? So we might have to de-center ourselves if we want to make space for things that are other than that. Absolutely. And I mean, the way that I kind of asked for how to bring about socio-technical imaginaries can easily be understood as if I was thinking that this would be as easy and as if this would be desirable in such a quasi top-down fashion, which of course I'm not. But I totally understand that. Yeah, the colonial and all of these things come back, right? And I think part of where my research also sits and often encounters is that the way that language and narrative is crafted from California has a long history, has a lot of continuity with things that seem often when new products are proposed to be very far away. But yeah, I mean, you don't have to look very far once you reframe the lens into the language of frontiers, hero stories of saviors coming and designing things that enable everybody else to be subjects, etc. These things are deep, cool stories that we tell and retell and package and repackage. And there I think we can meaningfully use the word we, because I think it is people like you and me that are that infrastructure in our bodies and our minds. Absolutely. This all kind of really nicely relates to the last episode of Future History is actually where I had Elisa Long Cone Antilleo as a guest, who is a Mapuche leader and was involved in the constitutional process of recently in Chile. Maybe, I mean, we are having this conversation as part of the, let's say, extended exhibition program of your show Metaverse Landscapes at the Kunstverein Hannover. So maybe let's have a little promo block at least. What are you investigating with this specific work of yours, the Metaverse Landscapes? Yeah, I mean, it doesn't need to be a promo block actually, because it flows on very well from the conversation we're having. My work, again, my role as an artist is I think to kind of try and take these feelings and observations that I have and dialogue with my various different conversations that I have and kind of make it into compelling objects that make sense within the context which I deploy them in the history of art and contemporary art making. And so I've made a series of paintings, which is a format that art has, that has been at the center of a certain type of art for a very long time, and modernism obviously is one of those. And, and also landscape painting has been something that I've been thinking about a lot in relation to exactly these questions, right. So, growing up in New Zealand, the first thing that I learned in art history class was about settler landscapes of New Zealand from European painters, and those European painters took the aesthetic language of Europe, and sort of like, you know, exported it, dragged and dropped it on top of, quote unquote, new spaces and lands, and they produced these images that were reproduced throughout the settler communities that were looking towards New Zealand, and that formed imaginaries in the minds of those settlers who would move there and start buying and selling land as, you know, as broken up pieces of property, and also just simply occupy those spaces and cultivate them in cultural and technological ways that Europe had been before, right. So, so I saw the role of the artists, which were often commissioned by, you know, private companies that did the early work of the colonial establishment that also had, by the way, you know, financial structures, which are very important to the history of modernism within them, joint stock companies, etc., you know, were part of colonial projects and, you know, absorbed into sovereign states after they'd kind of created these products out of the colonies they were producing, and artists produced these imageries which sort of captured some of the imaginaries of what those spaces were becoming, what they might become, and kind of political and financial possibilities of those lands. And I thought, hmm, that happening at the same time as I was looking at crypto assets a lot, thinking about the emergence of, you know, being able to own parts of the internet, maybe one could say that there's a sort of similar parceling up of what has been a commons into a space that you can now own and trade. And certainly that was made very explicit in metaverses where you could buy and sell properties in various different metaverses which were scarce and ways of pictorially imagining what those spaces might look like and what might be possible in them, which also drew on histories of image making. So if you buy a property in a prominent Ethereum adjacent metaverse like Decentraland, you buy a gridded image with a red dot in the middle of a sort of a part of a top down map, which looks like a grid to those who are trained in understanding modernist painting history. The grid on a square is a very important trope and was also adjacent to processing rationalized town planning. I'm thinking about painters like Piet Mondrian and very well known paintings like Broadway Boogie Woogie, which were of the kind of Manhattan grid or derived from the Manhattan grid and then went out into abstraction. And I was thinking, huh, maybe there's a similar role that I can play as a neo-colonial painter of these spaces that are being packaged and settled. So I've made modernist-esque paintings of existing properties in various metaverses, including Decentraland, which look at once like mid-century abstract grid painting and are indeed pictures of landscape properties that are being speculated on in this kind of neo-colonial environment that we're kind of experiencing with the growth of metaverses. And maybe the inevitability of capitalism moving on into virtual spaces as we reach the limits to what is possible in the kind of physical world, let's say. And so with those paintings of other people's properties that I've put in this exhibition, I also issued a new token that comes with each painting, which tracks the owner of that property that your painting depicts. So when you look at the painting that you see on the wall of the museum, or indeed if you own one at home, you're looking at a depiction of somebody else's property. And you can always scan the side of the painting where I've put a little QR code in to see who the owner of that property is at any given time. And also to see where the development of that property is going, because these metaverses change interfaces, they grow, they subdivide in different ways. Different actors do different things with various plots, and often those are reflected on the token itself that is the kind of proof of ownership of that property. So you can kind of have your painting of a certain moment in the early development of these early settled lands, and then you can also see where the kind of current development is at in these moments. So yeah, this is also about, I guess, exploring the continuities of these technological paradigms as they emerge. Fantastic. Simon, there's a last question that I ask all of my guests, and it is, if you think about the future, what makes you joyful? Ah, that's a great question. So I'm always thinking about the future, and especially in the role of being in touch with artists who are always trying to make new things and think about things in different ways. So what makes me joyful about the future is those special moments that I'm going to have learning about these artists' projects and how they reframe and package the world in moving ways, which help me understand and relate to what's going on, both in technology, politics and culture. Wonderful. Simon, thank you so much for being part of Future Histories. Thank you very much, Jan. It's been a real pleasure, and you're a fantastic conversation partner. It's really productive for me. Thank you. Thank you so much. I might like it as well. Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks. 

**Episode Keywords:**

#SimonDenny, #JanGroos, #FutureHistories, #FutureHistoriesInternational, #Podcast, #Interview, #NFT, #Crypto, #Blockchain, #Imaginaries, #Tech, #Colonialism, #DigitalSpaces, #Design, #Decentralization, #DigitalFuture, #DigitalInfrastructure, #GlobalCommunities, #TechnologyDebate, #Art, #KunstvereinHannover, #MetaverseLandscapes
