# FH Complete S02E31 - Thomas Swann on Anarchist Cybernetics | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Gross and it is my great pleasure to welcome Thomas Swann in today's episode. He's the author of Anarchist Cybernetics, Control and Communication in Radical Politics, a book I enjoyed reading immensely since it merges two fields of interest that are frequently featured in this podcast, anarchism and cybernetics. And a quick shout out, since they have an episode talking about the book Anarchist Cybernetics and since I enjoy their podcast in general quite a lot, I wanted to point you all towards the Cybernetic Marxist Podcast General Intellect Unit. You'll find the link in the show notes together with a bunch of other interesting material about and around Thomas' work. And now please enjoy today's episode with Thomas Swann on Anarchist Cybernetics. Welcome, Thomas. Thanks very much Jan, thanks for having me. I'm really, really glad you enjoyed the book and really looking forward to talking about it. Thank you. Great. I'm very much looking forward to it as well. Even though, as I said, both anarchism and cybernetics have been featured in future histories and other episodes already, I think it would be still good to start with a kind of overview. Could you give us a brief idea of your understanding of cybernetics as well as anarchism? Yeah, of course. Yeah. And so I'm going to start with anarchism because I think that's that was sort of my starting point going into cybernetics. And so I think there's sort of two elements of anarchism which are which are important to highlight. And the first of these is what we can kind of consider the critique that anarchism gives us. So anarchism gives us a certain set of tools for helping us understand why society looks the way it does, why politics operates the way it does, why the economy functions in the ways that it does. So right from the very early days of anarchism, so back to the sort of middle of the 19th century with people like Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, we really see this critique coming through really strong. So it really is a way of looking at how capitalism was developing, how colonialism was developing, and being able to provide tools to say, OK, we can understand what's happening here. We can understand why hierarchies emerge in societies. We can understand the links between the kind of hierarchical domination that we see in the state, where we have a sort of centralized top-down government that dictates laws and controls the police, has a monopoly on violence. How that is very, very closely connected and perhaps even inseparable from how economic exploitation operates through capitalism. So how the means of production are owned by wealthy capitalists. And that means that everyone else, the working class, are selling labor and are exploited in that. So that capitalists can make profit off of the labor that other people are doing. So anarchism gives us a way of linking those and seeing that the emergence of capitalism and the emergence of the state, of the modern state, were very much the same process. And they're different things with different operating logics, but they reinforce one another and they've emerged historically together because they are mutually beneficial and reinforce one another. And I think recently we've seen that sort of critique element of anarchism expanded by thinking in much more detail about how things like patriarchy and white supremacy and colonialism are also tied up in this picture. So you have that in the sort of history of anarchism with people like Lucy Parsons and Emma Goldman bringing a kind of feminist and sometimes anti-racist critique into that sort of critical element of anarchism. But over the last couple of decades, probably we've seen that come through much, much stronger, particularly as anarchism has started to draw on sort of black radical politics, black feminism, intersectionality. So we've seen a lot of that sort of critique coming through of how anarchism can help us explain why the world looks the way it does. But the second element of anarchism, which I think is really important as well, and perhaps even more important, is finding ways to dismantle or destroy those particular systems. So the state, capitalism, patriarchy, white supremacy, anarchism also gives us tools to understand them, but also to how can we dismantle or destroy them and create alternatives. So how can we think about how we govern our communities, how we create agreements between each other, how we guarantee security, guarantee safety, security in terms of physical safety, but also food security, material security, things like that. So anarchism gives us the tools to also build something different, build a kind of alternative to the systems that we currently face and importantly build alternatives that don't have domination, don't have hierarchical control, don't have economic exploitation, don't have racist or patriarchal domination built into them. So how can we create alternative systems? And there's a very close link between the critique and those alternatives, because what anarchists were doing from the very early days, one of the things that distinguishes anarchism is the kind of utopian elements of imagining what kind of future society can we create. That wasn't something that the anarchists were just sitting around and trying to think up, hey, what would the best society look like? They were actually taking inspiration from how indigenous societies were organized, how peasant communities were organized before capitalism. So they were really saying, okay, there are these seeds for how society can be organized in more democratic, more horizontal ways. We're not inventing this new. This is something that exists in the past and exists still in everyday life in a lot of ways. So it's really how we can sort of expand that so that that is the main logic of how we organize ourselves. So that kind of covers anarchism, I think, and there's probably a lot more to say about it, but that's, I think, the sort of bedrock of it. So it is a philosophy aimed at how can we critique things like domination and exploitation, but also how can we create alternatives? How can we create non-dominating ways of living together? How can we create non-exploitative ways of living together? And I think so for me, there's a close link between that and cybernetics, because at least the way I understand cybernetics and the way I discovered it was through a focus on self-organization. So cybernetics emerged kind of in the post-World War II technological and scientific milieu, particularly looking at electronic systems and very early computer systems and mechanical systems for how those systems can be autonomous and self-organized and don't require constant human control. But it quite quickly sort of developed into thinking about, well, can we apply some of that to social systems? So can we think about how social systems can be self-organized? And I think the way cybernetics, well, what's really useful about cybernetics and thinking this through is that what it tries to do is identify the functions for effective self-organization. So what are the different kind of functions that any system, electronic, social, mechanical, biological as well, what are the sort of functions that any of these systems need to have in order to be able to organize themselves without external control? And that's the really important thing for me with cybernetics. The way cyberneticians have sort of gone into this and expanded on this, there's a lot more detail there around the role of feedback, the role of information flows and communication. But I think at its foundations, it really is a way of saying we can pick out the different essential functions of a self-organizing system. And then with social systems, that's in a question of, OK, how do we, if those functions don't exist already, how do we create them? If they already exist, how do we strengthen them? How do we make social systems better at self-organizing? Hearing these definitions of anarchism and cybernetics already gives us an idea of this, but maybe you could elaborate a bit further. What potential did you see in bringing those two together, anarchism and cybernetics? What made you work towards anarchist cybernetics, actually? And maybe what was the problem you wanted to see addressed? Yes, so I think what got me interested in cybernetics, and I think that, well, yeah, I think starting from here might help answer that question. So what got me interested was, more than a decade ago now, when there was the 2011 uprisings, we had the Arab Spring and the Indignados in Spain and then the Occupy movement. But there was also the riots in London in that year as well, which aren't often brought into this picture of the 2011 uprisings, because a lot of people look at them and say, well, they weren't explicitly political, they didn't make demands. It was more this kind of eruption of chaos. But I think that sort of doesn't really do service to how that kind of riot is very political, how it's born of a particular political situation. And it is a reaction to the kind of political forces that people are experiencing in their lives. But what really interested me about the London riots was, you had this experience over three or four days when essentially lots of groups of teenagers were able to sort of outperform or outorganize one of the most well-resourced, well-adapted, largest police forces in the world. And the way they did that, which drew my attention, was because of the confluence of a certain number of factors. By accident, they actually had in their hands these incredibly powerful communication tools. So BlackBerry phones at the time were very, very cheap. They were trying to sort of, this is when BlackBerry was first trying to expand the use of smartphones. So they made these phones incredibly cheap. So loads of these teenagers had BlackBerry smartphones and BlackBerry had its own messaging system, which was incredibly strong encryption. So people could send messages. There was no way for the police to see those messages. There was no way for BlackBerry to actually get into that system and see those messages because it was a system that BlackBerry was trying to develop and market at big corporations and governments and things like that. So they wanted it to be incredibly secure. But what that meant was that you had these young people in London and other parts of the UK as well were able to network in real time incredibly effectively. So they were able to share information. They were able to communicate safe routes through the city. They were able to communicate the position of police around the city. And that allowed them to evade the police and escape arrest for quite some days. It didn't last that long, but it was still quite incredible that it managed for as long as it did. And that kind of tied in with a lot of sort of narratives around the time around network politics and how these new technologies, there was a sort of second wave of internet technologies which were becoming much more common and more accessible, but also much more mobile. So people had internet technologies in their pockets suddenly for the first time. And so there was a lot of talk around 2011 and the years around that about this new kind of networked form of politics. And yes, it was more information was shared very fast and allowed people to respond and adapt to situations very, very quickly without needing to have a centralized control structure that was taking information in and then giving orders out. But then also we saw with things like Occupy and the Arab Spring and Dignados, that also brought a democratic element in because partly because of these technologies, but also just because of the kind of politics that people were working with at the time. These movements were much more radically democratic than a lot of uprisings and revolutions that we've seen in the past. That period is typically referred to as the movement of the squares because one of the things that was typified by was people occupying public squares in different parts of big cities and typically across the world, people were holding assemblies. They were making decisions democratically. There weren't really leaders in a traditional sense. And people, everyone, at least in theory, everyone could participate in how these social movements were governed. So they were very self-organized in a very anarchistic sense, even if they weren't all explicitly anarchist or drawing on anarchist politics. But I think that sort of, for me, sort of drew me into cybernetics. And it was through reading the work of Colin Ward, a very, very influential British anarchist in the post-war years, 60s through to the 80s or 90s. Colin Ward is one of the most influential figures in British anarchism in this period. And he writes a lot about self-organization and he sort of drops the word cybernetics a couple of times and things that he wrote, but doesn't really expand on it in much detail. But I think just reading that and the word cybernetics, I was like, oh, that sounds interesting. That's quite a sexy term that I've not heard mentioned before. And that sort of drew me in and realized, well, there were a handful of engagements with cybernetics by anarchists kind of from the very early 1960s onwards, probably through the 1980s. And it was around linking how cybernetics sees self-organization. So as I mentioned in this sort of way of identifying what are the sort of functions for effective self-organization, but also just that very basic point about systems are at their most effective in dealing with change, dealing with complex environments. When they have a high level of flexibility and a high level of autonomy built into the systems and self-organization allows for that because you don't need to have a central sort of organizing core in a system. Because if you're dealing in a complex environment, the sort of information flow into that central organizing core and then the decision making and the orders that then come out of it, that's a very slow process or it can be a very slow process. And a lot of the work of some of the cyberneticians that I've sort of focused on, we can talk more about them in detail if you'd like. But they kind of identify, well, if a system is in a complex environment that's changing very fast and it's trying to filter information through some central control hub, you know, by the time that information is taken in, processed and orders are fed back out, the situation will have changed again. And so those orders won't be actually relevant. So the way systems cope with that is by being self-organized so that the different parts have a high level of autonomy to actually respond to change as they see fit. So they have some level of autonomy whereby they can say, okay, it's a complex environment. It's suddenly changing and we don't have to wait for orders. We don't have to send information up the chain and wait for a decision to be made and come back down to us. We can just make a decision and operate in this complex environment ourselves. And I think that kind of autonomy is also one of the strong links with anarchism. And it's something we saw in the, you know, these 2011 movements, you know, the London riots, these different groups of teenagers, which were running around, were autonomous. There wasn't a central control structure. They were autonomously, because of the information that was being shared in these communication networks, they were able to move around the city autonomously, avoid the police, you know, get to safe places, have escape routes. So they were able to coordinate themselves in a very decentralized and autonomous way. So I think that's exploring that in more detail as a sort of potential for anarchist engagement with cybernetics. Very interesting, because I thought that your first interest, but this was just me reading your book. I thought your first interest or the gateway through which you came to cybernetics would have been exactly what you talked about in the last sentences. Because, I mean, one of the more popular readings of these movement of the squares is that while these were experiences that are super important, still, they argued to have been very ineffective and that they kind of failed in some way. And that was me thinking when reading your book that your engagement with cybernetics was also you thinking that cybernetics would be of help. Exactly on this question, on this problem of how to effectively organize these approaches that you're actually in favor of through applying a cybernetic lens, so to speak. I would guess this was somewhat one of the things that drove you to cybernetics as well. Yeah, it was. Yeah. So I think that question of how successful these movements were is really, really important. I think we can look at it in a number of ways. And I think one of them is to think how effective or how successful were they at bringing about some kind of large scale political or economic change. And we can look across the world and see, well, yeah, there's sort of very, very mixed results there. So obviously, in the very immediate term, some of the movements in North Africa and the Middle East were able to overthrow governments. Whether the situations they've got now are in line with the aspirations of those movements, that's obviously incredibly debatable. And we also see, obviously, some of these in places like Libya and Syria, the outcomes has been civil war and huge amount of violence and destruction and people having to flee their homes in massive numbers. So it's obviously like, yeah, whether there was a sort of immediate political change that was in line with the demands or the desires of those movements, that's incredibly debatable. I think if we look at somewhere like, well, in the UK or the United States as well, we can see, well, part of a sort of outcome of these movements was a kind of delayed response in a sense. But then, from 2015 up until 2020, we had this sort of new left-wing populist surge in the UK around Jeremy Corbyn and in the US around Bernie Sanders and some other similar politicians. So we can see that's kind of, I mean, and there is stuff in those sort of populist surges around more direct democracy, more decentralized democratic systems, certainly economic systems that are much, much fatter and involve more opportunity for participation. But yeah, definitely these movements didn't achieve what they set out to achieve in very concrete terms. But one of the other things that they were trying to do, which I think they did succeed in, was trying to imagine an experiment with new ways of organizing societies. So Occupy is the example that I've looked into the most, but we see similar things in the different movements of the squares around the world. Occupy was able to create a kind of microcosm of radically democratic, radically participatory society. And it was something important. This is, again, where I think this sort of anarchist politics isn't coming from the position of saying, we've come up with this perfect utopian blueprint. Now let's put it into practice. It was very much an experiment. It was very much saying, well, let's try these different ways of doing democracy. Let's try them out and let's adapt them as we go on. So something we see with Occupy is, you know, it started with the General Assembly, which, you know, was, you know, these were, you know, large meetings run for the most part by consensus decision-making. Everyone had to be in agreement for a certain proposal to actually be passed. And these were meetings involving, in the case of Occupy Wall Street, thousands of people were taking part in these meetings, sometimes multiple times a day. And these were incredibly effective, you know, incredibly complex and detailed decisions were being made in these assemblies. People were dealing with complex legal things, complex financial matters, and they were able to do this fairly effectively. But as time went on with Occupy Wall Street in particular, they started to see, well, this large General Assembly perhaps isn't the most effective way of doing a lot of the day-to-day coordination and administration of, you know, a large encampment of people. So they created, you know, sort of a smaller spokes council where it would be, you know, delegates from different working groups and different parts of the camp would be involved in making these more kind of strategic decisions. The General Assembly still happened, but they were more for, you know, more sort of broader political discussions and decisions. Then the spokes council was a way of making the strategic decision-making much more effective and much more coordinated. So I think it's important to see these movements, part of the success of them is that they were trying and testing and adapting and experimenting with, you know, really, really radical ways of thinking about how we can organize society in very democratic, very participatory ways. And I think that's part of the legacy we have to sort of hold on to and see, okay, how is that sort of legacy of rather than just talking about maybe these, you know, new forms of democracy would work? Well, you know, people have tried them in large, large groups under very, very difficult circumstances, have tried them and adapted them and come out with, you know, sort of solutions to a lot of the problems that emerged. I think another thing about the sort of failure of these movements, the kind of odds they were up against were massive, right? I mean, when Occupy Walls, when the Occupy movement in the U.S. was finally put down, you know, that was a huge coordinated police action, you know, across the whole of the U.S. At exactly the same time, police forces, you know, highly militarized police forces with, you know, very, very advanced sort of capabilities in terms of, you know, crowd control and dealing with large groups of people. You know, they moved in and dismantled and destroyed these camps all at the same time. And I think to try and imagine how the Occupy movement could have withstood that and could have survived in some kind of real form beyond that is that's very difficult to imagine what that could have looked like. I mean, the way it did survive was into something like Occupy Sandy. So when Hurricane Sandy hit New York, the mutual aid network that emerged, which was, you know, for several days was the main sort of coordination of, you know, aid and support and shelter and resources for people who were affected by this hurricane. That was organized by people who had been part of the Occupy Wall Street movement. And they were applying a lot of this stuff around, you know, decentralized organization, you know, autonomous network coordination. They were applying that to that mutual aid effort. So that's something, one of the really important things that did emerge out of Occupy in the U.S. at least. Yeah, and I think it's super important that we look at the actual experiences and not just ditch them as if everything failed. And it's super important to kind of learn out of these experiences since we actually do want to build structures that do live on and survive, that do not kind of end when one coordinated effort through the state destroys the actual camps. In this case, we do need and do want structures that survive beyond such a blow. And for this, we need to enrich the analytic aspect of looking at the movement of the squares and enrich the tactics, the strategies and in your language, the grand strategies that we apply in order to achieve these goals. So let's dive a little deeper into the components of anarchist cybernetics. I mean, cybernetics is kind of by definition a very broad field when it comes to anarchist cybernetics. You are specifically interested in a subfield, a subfield called organizational cybernetics. And within this subfield, you focus on the work of Stafford Beer and his viable system model. So could you give us an overview of the VSM, the viable system model and how it informs anarchist cybernetics? Yeah, so the viable system model, I think, is really, really interesting. So what it does as a kind of model of how any kind of system can be organized is it tries to sort of separate out the different functions within a system. And very broadly it does. So there's two very broad parts of this kind of model, of this picture of an effective self-organizing system. So one is the kind of operational part. So you have, you know, the actual day to day operations of any system. So if we're thinking about, you know, something like, I mean, yeah, we could look at something that occupied Wall Street, but I think something I'm really interested in at the moment is thinking about how this applies to worker cooperatives. So I'll kind of take that example a bit. So if we imagine a kind of cafe that's run in a kind of, you know, collective cooperative way. So the day to day operations would be, you know, obviously, you know, you know, producing food, you know, making drinks, serving customers, you know, opening and closing, cleaning, things like this. So you have these sort of day to day activities. And then you also have how these are sort of coordinated in a very immediate way, right? So you have to make sure, for example, if a customer puts in an order for, you know, a meal and some drinks, that, you know, okay, who's making the drinks and who's making the food? There has to be some coordination there so that, you know, they kind of arrive at the right time and the person's not, I don't know, sitting with their food for an hour before the drink comes or the other way around. So there has to be some sort of basic coordination between these different functions. But then what the VSM does, which I think is really interesting, is it says, okay, so this is the operational part, these basic functions and how they coordinate. But we also have a kind of meta systemic part, which is the kind of broader or more strategic coordination of sort of system or organization as a whole. So if we take this example of the kind of, you know, cooperative cafe, this would be thinking about questions of how does the sort of business strategy develop within this collective? So it might be that they have weekly meetings where they, you know, reflect on what's happened during the week, you know, do things like, you know, monitor how much stock is left, how much has been sold, whether some things are more popular than others and whether there's any sort of conflicts between different parts of the operation. And it allows them to sort of reflect on that outside of the day to day context and sort of step out of that and say, OK, well, now we're going to look at this as a kind of system as a whole. And we're going to have this systemic overview of everything that's happening rather than just the day to day immediate coordination. And I think that sort of meta system is what is really important with the viable systems model. So I think it's the kind of thing that is often there's often not that separation between the day to day operations and the sort of meta systemic strategy or coordination or monitoring. Often when a lot of in a lot of ways, things like cooperatives or anarchist collectives are described in terms of organization. There's a kind of mixing of these and they're kind of bound up together and they're not really not really distinguished at all. And I think when that happens, often what it means is that some of the key functions that, as I said, cybernetics identifies don't happen or don't happen well enough or happen at the wrong time. So I think separating these things out allows us to sort of say, OK, we can identify what the key functions of this meta systemic strategy are and we can make sure that they happen in the right ways. And importantly, from an anarchist perspective or from the perspective of a worker owned cooperative, how can we make sure these functions are organized in a democratic and participatory way? So rather than just saying the typical business, well, there's the day to day activities and then there's the management activities. And that's sort of management decisions and management strategy. There's a select group of people who are a kind of elite within the organization who have the decision making power over what happens there. From an anarchist perspective, separating these things out allows us to say, well, we can have these functions. We can be doing things like developing a long term strategy, monitoring performance in different ways, making decisions about how we can coordinate things better, how we can move resources around in better ways, how we can communicate in better ways. But we can do all these things in democratic and participatory ways. So it doesn't mean that we have the operational parts of the organization, which is the workers and then the meta systemic strategy parts, which is the managers. Essentially, we have the same people doing both, not at the same time, because that's when it becomes too complicated and too difficult to manage, but at a certain point stepping out of the operational roles and into the strategy roles. So as I said, this could be weekly meetings, monthly meetings, maybe once a year there would be a kind of larger strategy discussion. But you have these sort of moments when people can step out of their operational roles into the more strategic roles. And that allows for that kind of coordination to happen in democratic ways. You mentioned at some point within your answer that sometimes these things get mixed up and then some of the functions actually do not really happen and are not being addressed. And I would add that sometimes, depending on the context, you even have the situation that people are opposed to actually applying some of these functions. I mean, in the example of the cafe, it's a bit more relaxed, I would say, because people might intuitively grasp that there is a need for some kind of higher level coordination as well. But if you take the example of a society as a whole and try to apply this lens, then you will come to questions of hierarchy versus autonomy and stuff like that. And then specifically within anarchist communities, you might have some strong reaction actually against having this higher level, so to speak, coordination function being applied because it is perceived as a form of unwanted hierarchy. So I think it would be fruitful. And this is something you do within the book in a very good way, I would say. I think it would be fruitful to use the VSM as a diagnostic tool in order to look at some of the key principles that are relevant for anarchist organization from a different perspective, from the perspective of anarchist cybernetics in this case. Because I think you can, by doing that, address some of the more fundamental open questions within anarchist organization. So maybe you could elaborate a bit. What does it look like to apply the viable system model to anarchist self-organization? Maybe you could give us an overview of an anarchist viable system model. Yeah, so the way that I've done it in the book, and that's just a product of the fact that it's a written document like a book, is very much me on the outside looking at something like the Occupy movement or like I've just done for this cooperative cafe. You're looking at it from the outside and seeing how does this work in terms of a viable, effective system. But the way that it really ought to be applied is in a much more participatory and involved way. So rather than someone like myself standing on the outside and analyzing the organization, it's something that the people in the organization should be doing collectively. So part of their discussions might be, okay, how can we start to understand the different functions? And one of the incredibly useful tools in doing this is work that was developed by John Walker. So John Walker was somebody who was working in a number of cooperatives in the north of England in the 1980s, 1990s, and got in contact with Stafford Beer because he started to learn about cybernetics and thinking that maybe this could work for cooperatives. And what John Walker's done is he's written a sort of handbook on the viable systems model for cooperatives. And it's not explicitly anarchist, but I think it does chime incredibly well with anarchist politics. And so what John sort of suggests is he does an incredible amount of detail because he's tried this with different cooperatives time and again. So he's worked out in terms of this is the process that actually works. But he basically just goes through a number of steps that you would do with a group. So if you're in a cooperative, you can look at John's viable systems model guide and go through different steps, answer different questions. And what that means essentially is doing things like trying to identify the environment that you're operating in as an organization. What are the different factors involved in that environment? How does the environment change? And then also positioning yourself as an organization within that. So what are the sort of interactions you have with the environment? At what point of the organization are you engaging with different situations that are maybe changing in different ways? So to take the example of the cafe, for example, they might say, well, part of our environment is the customers that are coming in to the business. And we have people who are engaging with them. We have cooks who are making food for them, people making drinks, people taking orders from them. You have these different ways of interacting with that environment. And that's the kind of starting point, I think, for thinking about how this viable systems model process can work within an organization. Because once people start to do that and John's viable systems model guide goes through a lot of steps and a lot more detail. But you start to sort of actually identify the different functions. So you start to say, OK, what are our different operational parts of our organization? As I said, it might be people serving customers, people making the food, people making the drinks, people doing the cleaning. So you can start to sort of map out the different operational parts of the organization. And the way John talks about this is you actually have massive sheets of paper and you write all this down. You start to start to actually map out what the organization does day to day. And then you can start to think, well, how do these interact? So what are the points where these different functions interact with each other? So when do the different operational parts come into contact? And that just starts allowing you to see, OK, is there any other clashes? Is there any sort of conflict here? Are there any areas where actually the way they come into contact isn't the most effective? It creates more problems than it solves. So you can start to sort of help with some of the coordination that way just by mapping out those interactions. But then you can also go to the next kind of meta-systemic level and start to say, OK, within the organization, where is it we are doing strategy, for example? Where is it we are thinking about long term planning? Is this something we are doing? And again, you can sort of map this out in the big piece of paper. Well, OK, we have this monthly meeting where we do this. Or maybe we don't. Maybe we need to start doing it. Maybe we need to have a monthly meeting where we talk about strategy, where we look at what's happening outside the business and the environment, but also what's happening within it. So what kind of changes are happening? Is there any conflicts? Are there any difficulties? Are there any issues that are developing? You can have that internal and external view. And also you can start saying, how are we actually monitoring what's happening? Do we have any functions within our organization for actually keeping a track of what's happening day to day? So that we can then say, well, this works really well. This doesn't work really well. This could be better this way. This could be more effective if it was done like this. If you start mapping out these functions of how are we monitoring things, how are we developing a long term strategy, it allows you to see, OK, maybe we could be doing these better. Or maybe if we're not doing them, we can start doing them. Maybe we can learn from what other cooperatives are doing around us. And I think these are these are the steps that something like an anarchist collective or cooperative, even just a community of people living together, could be going through. So it's taking that time to actually sit down and have discussions about what is it we're doing day to day? How is that coordinated? Could that coordination be made more effective now that we've started to map it out and actually look at it? And in this kind of, you know, have this sort of overview. But then also, how are we actually monitoring things? How are we checking that things are working OK? That could be monitoring performance. Also, just checking, is everyone happy in the organization? Does everyone still feel fulfilled? Does everyone still feel at home in this community? You can start checking for these things in more conscious ways, I think. And then building a strategy that takes all of this into account. Well, you were answering. I'm thinking like, all right, this very much sounds like something that already happens within our societies today in the form of business consulting, so to speak. And this is, of course, not a coincidence, because there would be was a business consultant as well. So I think it would be important to kind of tie this back to why this kind of thinking is actually also fruitful for trying to achieve some of the normative goals of anarchism as well. Because otherwise people might hear you talk and think, oh, well, Thomas is trying to get into the business of business consulting. So how is this in line with coming to a post-capitalist anarchist cybernetic world, so to speak? But it actually is helpful as well. And I think it would be important for us to kind of carve out how and why. And one way of doing it would be through taking some of these core principles and trying to figure out what they mean within anarchism and what they mean within cybernetics. So you already mentioned self-organization a couple of times and how this was one of the gateways that led you to cybernetics because you immediately thought, all right, this is something of an interesting overlap. So could you maybe explain what self-organization means within the different fields? Yes. So I think in cybernetics, self-organization is just quite a technical term. It's quite a sort of descriptive technical term for how a system is organized. And, you know, an electronic system or a mechanical system can be self-organized. So the sort of classic example is the steam engine, which has a certain part of the mechanism. It's a thing called a governor, which is basically a way to regulate speed. So as the engine speeds up, the governor, you know, kind of, well, it's hard to sort of describe it without a picture in front of me. But as the engine speeds up, the governor responds to that speed and the way it responds slows the system down. So it's a way where the system can regulate itself. Thermostats do that as well. Okay, you know, thermostats, when the room gets above a certain temperature, the air conditioning will come on and bring the temperature back down. So in cybernetics terms, that's self-organized, right? Because no one's having to manually adjust the speed of the engine. I'm not in my room having to constantly go back and turn the air conditioning on when it gets too hot and then turn it off again when it's too cold. The thermostat does that itself. Obviously, that's very different from how we think about self-organization in political terms. So when we're talking about self-organization in political terms, it's, on the one hand, taking in that kind of technical definition of saying, okay, how can a collective, a community, a cooperative, a social movement, how can it perform the tasks that it wants to perform, achieve the goals that it wants to achieve in a sort of self-regulating way where it doesn't need a leadership clique or a leadership party to actually do the controlling. It just does it itself through how it's organized and how it communicates. So there is that technical element in there, but there's also importantly the political element, which is very much saying, well, okay, self-organization is actually about everyone being able to participate in the decisions that have any impact on their lives. So it's about a sort of participatory and democratic way of organizing in any kind of community or collective. So in that way, self-organization is less about how technically efficient it is or effective it is and much more about, well, it allows us to develop ourselves in a sort of free and autonomous way, both collectively and as individuals. And for the anarchists, this is very, very closely linked to ideas of human flourishing. So how can we actually develop ourselves as some kind of rounded, happy individuals with the kind of resources for genuine well-being? How can we do that in a community which is collectively self-organized? So how is my individual freedom linked to the collective process of self-organization where we are as a group free and autonomous and making our own decisions? So I think self-organization is these two different things. It's on the one hand, the technical thing of this is the most effective way of organizing systems. And also the political thing of this is the way that communities or collectives can be organized that gives us the most freedom, that gives us the most opportunity. Yeah, that gives us the most opportunity for collective and individual autonomy and fulfillment. And I think anarchism has always had its eye on both of these. So even if you look back to some of the classical anarchists, like Peter Kropotkin, who was an anarchist geographer writing at the end of the 19th century and started the 20th century, he very much sees anarchism as being a politically desirable system of governance, whereby people have more freedom, people are happier, people have more well-being, people are able to look after themselves much better, they have better economic standards. But also a much more effective way of organizing society, because he says, well, the state is this very slow, very cumbersome, very blunt tool for trying to organize society. If we can do this autonomously, we allow for much more harmony with nature. It allows us to have a much better alignment with how nature operates. And we can build our communities in ways that are more sustainable with the way that change and the way that self-organization happens in natural systems as well. Maybe I would add, and this is maybe already a learning, so to speak, also from the experiences, for example, in the movement of the squares. Since you point out that ideally you have these two elements of self-organization as two sides of the same coin. So you have the normative ideal of self-organization as well as effective self-organization through allowing a form of distributed control, so to speak. I would maybe add that I understood the book as if you wanted to say that you can have both of these, but in order to get them, you would have to organize in a specific way. So it's not that you can just merely decentralize as people might have thought about anarchism for actually a long period. You cannot do merely that and think that you can have the effective side of self-organization as well. But you would have to think about the ways in which the organization is structured in a very specific way, and that's why you take the VSM. And I already mentioned control. I think it would be good to maybe take a look at this term as well, because this is something that might lead to some misunderstandings specifically amongst anarchist circles, I would say. Because, of course, there might be a reflex to think that control is like immediate control of domination, the domination of one person over another. But within cybernetics, this is thought of very differently. So could you maybe elaborate how the term control is being used in the context of anarchist cybernetics? And then we will go from there. Yeah, so I think you're totally right. I think there's a few sort of pieces of terminology in thinking about anarchist cybernetics that do rub up against how we typically think of anarchist politics. And I think control is definitely one of them. So typically, we think of control as command and control hierarchies, where control means domination. It means someone subordinating someone else, someone following the orders from someone above them, that person above them is in control of them. And I think what cybernetics allows us to do is think about that in a very, very different way. So control is much more, as I've sort of discussed already, the way self-organization operates in systems, according to cybernetics, the most sort of effective way for self-organization to operate is without any kind of centralized or external control. So we think, well, what's actually happening in these systems? They are still coordinated. They are still making complex decisions. They are still responding in a coordinated and collective way to changes and complexity in their environments. And that is all happening through control. So the system, in a sense, controls itself. So that's where self-organization, so self-control, and it's much less even the term self-control. And we think of self-control as like the individual trying to control our passions in some way. It's much less of that. It's much more, you know, if we're in a group of people and we make a decision collectively, we agree on something and we do that, then we have control over ourselves. We've been able to do something coordinated and in an effective and democratic way. So that's how control operates. I think there's a few sort of metaphors for how control operates in cybernetics. So Elena Leonard, who's one of the sort of foremost authors within the sort of organizational cybernetics tradition, described it as a kind of balancing. So if you imagine one of the sort of metaphors is like someone skiing downhill. So, I mean, I've never skied, but I can kind of imagine what skiing is like. You know, you're kind of moving from side to side. You're kind of adapting to the environment, shifting with how the ground changes, what's in front of you. You're in some kind of self-organized control where you're feeding back from the environment. You're taking in what's happening around about you. You're steering yourself in subtle ways. It's not sort of there's not somebody on the outside pulling your strings, essentially. I think another really, really nice metaphor for this, and this is in a book by a Dutch anarchist, Roel van Daan. So he wrote a book called Message of a Wise Kabouter. So Kabouter is a kind of gnome, and he describes Peter Kropotkin as a kind of gnome-like figure. So gnome's like sort of short with big beards. And for van Daan, there's an element of gnomes live in a more harmonious way with nature. But he describes it, possibly a very, very Dutch example, in terms of riding a bicycle. So he says, OK, so you're riding a bicycle. Obviously, you're steering, so you're in control that way. But there's also there's wind coming in from different sides. The wind maybe blows you, and so you lean very, very slightly to one side to sort of counteract the wind. Maybe you go around a corner, so you lean in a slightly different way to allow yourself to go around the corner on the bicycle. All of these are parts of a sort of very subtle system of control. It's taking information from the environment. The wind's blowing this way. I'm feeling that in myself. I'm feeling myself be shifted one way so I can subtly lean the other way. It's not even necessarily totally conscious. It's something we probably do quite well, at least if we're used to cycling. We do it quite naturally without thinking about it. And I think that kind of control, so imagining someone cycling and responding to the wind and managing to keep themselves going, I think is really, really important. But I think the metaphor of the bicycle is really, really interesting for me because it tells us how important the environment is here. So if you imagine cycling on a bicycle track or a bicycle lane, if that bicycle lane had incredibly sharp corners in it, you'd really, really struggle to get around those corners. You'd have to step off the bike and turn the bike around and then start again. I'm sure in Germany you've got really, really good bicycle lanes. In the UK, we either have none or if we do have them, they're just useless and terrible. So I think for me that tells us how important the environmental conditions are to how we can have that self-organized kind of control. It's not just about what we do as an organization, as a collective, it's also about the environment we're in and how the environment is structured. Does the environment allow us to have some kind of self-organization and have that kind of balancing idea of control? And there are some very nice kind of phrases within your book as well which try to give an idea of how this relation is thought of. For example, control is in each function not top-down or the control function is spread throughout the architecture of the system. So this very much highlights this idea of not having one centralized body that gives out orders and everybody else is supposed to follow. However, and this is something that we definitely will have to talk about and which is very interesting I think in the way that you approach this, anarchist cybernetics does not say that there is full autonomy for everybody so that everybody could simply do what he or she or they might want to do in a given situation and actually approach some form of highly individualistic autonomy so to speak. Instead, you try to approach the question of autonomy as well as the question of freedom and hierarchy and you try to approach these questions from a different angle. So you propose, for example, functional hierarchy instead of structural hierarchy. So maybe let's take a look at these different elements and start with the question of hierarchy. What's the difference between the two forms of hierarchy that you describe, functional hierarchy and structural hierarchy, and why might functional hierarchy serve us better? Yes, so the distinction between functional and structural hierarchy, so that's something that comes from Gordon Pask who is another of the really sort of influential cyberneticians in the post-World War II years, a very close friend of Stafford Beers. His interest is more in communication systems and electronic systems. He's less interested in social systems although he uses them as examples an awful lot and he is very political in what he writes. He makes this distinction to try and say we have the sort of structural hierarchy within a system which is within an organization is how we would typically think of a hierarchical organizational chart. So you have the boss at the top. You maybe have sort of senior managers and below them you maybe have middle managers and then you have maybe workers at the very bottom. But essentially you have a sort of top-down decision-making structure. So it's hierarchical in the sense that decisions are made at the top and then those decisions are fed down through the hierarchy to people at the bottom who just have to implement those decisions. They don't have any autonomy, any say in anything, no decision-making power. They just implement those decisions. So that's a structural hierarchy and that's obviously the kind of thing that anarchists are, as a kind of starting point for anarchism, very much opposed to. Functional hierarchy is something quite different. So functional hierarchy is instead saying that there is a kind of logical ordering of decision-making whereby some decisions come logically prior to other decisions. So one way of thinking about this is in terms of kind of strategy and tactics distinction. As I mentioned looking at the VSM, you have this higher function metasystemic part of the system which is where things like grand strategy and strategy are developed. In terms of thinking about this as a kind of effective organization, those are decisions that come before the operational or tactical decisions. So in order for us to know what tactics are going to be best to us, in order for us to know how we can best operate in the kind of day-to-day of an organization, we need to have a strategy first. So we develop a strategy that tells us these are our goals, these are our aims, these are the values and principles that we have, these are our priorities. This is what we need to maximize and minimize. And that helps us decide on what kind of tactics, what kind of day-to-day actions we can take. So in a sense, there's a sort of hierarchical ordering there. Strategy comes above tactics. And obviously in typical organizations, that functional hierarchy and the structural hierarchy are meshed together. So you have the strategic decisions are taken by the bosses, by the managers, and the tactical stuff, the actions, the day-to-day actions are things that workers are doing. And they just take the orders and do the actions as they're told to do. What I think anarchist cybernetics opens up, I think this is something that's in cybernetics anyway, but I think an anarchist focus in cybernetics helps us reinforce this and helps us see how important this is. I think we can have the functional hierarchy so we can have the logical ordering of decision-making where one decision has to be made in order for us to be able to make the other decision. So one decision is higher than the other. We can have that logical ordering, can have that hierarchy of decision-making without the structural hierarchy. So as I said, looking at the VSM and that example of the CAFE, the people who are doing the day-to-day activities, the people who are doing the tactical action, which is functionally lower than the strategic decision-making, they are the same people who are doing the strategic decision-making. There's not a manager who's making those strategy decisions, there's not a boss who's making those decisions. It's the same people who are doing the serving, the making the drinks, the cooking, they at a certain point stop doing that and they go into a meeting or they go into a discussion, they go into some kind of forum where they're doing the strategy stuff. So it's very much saying we can have the functional ordering of decision-making where some decisions have to come first and then we can make other ones, but everybody in the organization can be involved at all levels of that functional hierarchy. So it doesn't require a structural hierarchy where certain decisions can only be made by people higher up in the organization. And I want to add maybe for the audience that is on the critical side of things when it comes to cybernetics, I want to add that since we do already have cybernetics very much within our world today acting as actually maybe even already at least in some parts hegemonic principle, I would like to add that if you take a look at capitalist cybernetics and the way in which huge companies like Google, Facebook, Amazon, whatever, apply cybernetic thinking that they do exactly what you just mentioned. They collapse functional hierarchy and structural hierarchy and they try to make use of elements of functional hierarchy where lower elements within the organization might have some limited autonomy in order to become more effective, but they do still keep the structural hierarchy in which at the end you do have the bosses, you do have the managers, you do have the people who will tell you what to do, and this is very much structured along strong hierarchy. So this is something I actually want to point out at this point, I would say. And again, I think this also shows how this lens is actually very fruitful as an analytic lens because it makes you see the difference. So this is something I really like when reading your book. And still, when it comes to anarchist cybernetics, we do have to point out that, as I said, it's not about having unrestricted autonomy since you do have these elements of grand strategy, you do have these elements everybody will have to be on board with, so to speak, and because of that, you automatically have some boundaries in terms of your own individual autonomy because it actually is a logical result of having decisions being made collectively beforehand and yourself having to kind of align with this overarching identity and principles of the organization, so to speak. So maybe let's talk about this relation. Let's talk about this question of autonomy that is implicit within this relation because both in anarchism and cybernetics, autonomy plays a very crucial role. However, again, we find very different understandings of what autonomy means in the respective fields. Stafford B identifies three constraints on autonomy, and this is specifically interesting when it comes to anarchist cybernetics because some of these constraints seem to, at least at first sight, go against the grain of some of the core principles of anarchist organization. Again, we have to say. But I think you do a good job in the book in pointing out why these constraints are actually not only necessary, but also compatible with an anarchist approach. And these constraints are, and I will read them out. This is a quote by Stafford Beer. The first of the constraints would be autonomous parts must operate in coordination with other autonomous parts. The second one is autonomous parts must operate within the intentions of the whole organization. And this would be the third one. Autonomous parts must face the possibility of being excluded from the organization as a whole. So these are the three constraints. What is the understanding of autonomy in anarchist cybernetics? Yes, I think as you sort of suggested, it first does seem like it clashes with how we may understand autonomy or freedom. I think I'm collapsing these terms, autonomy and freedom. There's a discussion about whether there's a distinction between them, but I'm kind of collapsing them a bit. There is a definite question here about does the understanding of autonomy that's in cybernetics fundamentally clash with how we understand it in anarchism? So I think going through those three principles that you just read out, I think for the first two, there's not necessarily a problem there. So, you know, saying that the autonomous parts have to be in coordination with other autonomous parts. You know, that's just that sort of fundamental thing of saying, okay, my autonomy shouldn't constrain your autonomy and your autonomy shouldn't constrain my autonomy. So, okay, we can be autonomous, but we have to sort of coordinate that autonomy so that, you know, like me trying to be free or be autonomous doesn't prevent you from being free or being autonomous. We have to just make sure there's some kind of coordination there. And that might mean certain limits on what we can do as individuals, but ultimately it's there so that, you know, there's a sort of maximum amount of autonomy that means that everyone can still enjoy it. The second part I think also doesn't necessarily immediately suggest a clash with anarchism. So thinking about, well, the autonomous parts of an organization need to operate within the intentions of the whole organization. So that's something kind of, you know, fairly accepted within a lot of anarchist organizations. Yes, different parts of a federation or different branches of an organization will have some autonomy. They'll have some sort of freedom to make their own decisions in their own environments and their own environmental niches. But they're still part of the organization as a whole. And there's going to be some decisions which are kind of higher level of and a certain functionally higher level of decision making, where they might not have complete autonomy. So because they're still part of the whole organization. So, for example, if this is an anarchist trade union, for example, there's going to be different branches of that trade union, which have autonomy to do maybe organize on different priorities. They pick their own campaigns, divide up, you know, workloads in their own autonomous ways, raise money themselves, manage their finances themselves in autonomous ways. But there's going to be some kind of key organizational principles that they don't have autonomy over. So, for example, I'm thinking of the industrial workers of the world here. You know, part of their sort of fundamental, you know, the fundamental starting point for this for their politics is that people who are bosses or people who have any power over any direct power over hiring and firing workers can't be a member of the union, because then they're on the boss side rather than on the worker side. So if a particular branch of the IWW said, you know, we'd we'd quite like to invite this boss and because he seems like a nice person, got seems like they've got good politics, talks good, we're friends with them. We want to them to be a member. That's not going to be possible within that organization. So their autonomy is restricted there by virtue of the fact that they're part of this larger organization. So I think that's not necessarily an issue for or doesn't present itself as an issue for anarchists. I think the third principle that you mentioned is perhaps where we might imagine there's a more fundamental clash. So the idea that there's a kind of ultimate restriction on autonomy, which is being excluded from the organization. So there's a point when for whatever reason, a certain part of the organization or a certain individual might be excluded, might be kicked out of the organization, whatever kind of organization as a federation, collective, whatever. And that's something I think some anarchists may at first find issue with because they'd say, well, no, we don't want to be excluding people. We don't want to be, you know, doing that horrible thing of saying to someone, yeah, you're no longer part of the group. We don't want you in this organization. We're going to evict you or expel you or whatever. But actually this is something which happens, maybe not regularly, but it is a tool within the kind of anarchist toolbox. So particularly if we think about things like when certain individuals have been accused of committing sexual assault, for example, and maybe haven't been part of the sort of the kind of transformative justice process within a collective is saying, we'll have some kind of accountability process. We'll have some kind of process of mediation and where hopefully we can still all live together. You know, the person who committed the assault can hopefully learn what they did wrong and, you know, grow as a person and won't do that again. The person who is who is the victim accepts that that process is fair and thinks, yeah, OK, we can we can still exist as a collective. But then there might be a problem, a point where that breaks down. And actually, it's impossible for, you know, the person who committed the sexual assault to actually remain part of that collective or part of that community. It's no longer considered safe for the other people, for them to be part of that community. And that's that's the kind of worst case scenario, perhaps in terms of thinking about anarchists and radical approaches to justice. But it is something that happens. And when that happens, you know, expelling a person from the organization and evicting them from from the community is a kind of tool that people have in that circumstance. So it is something that it's something we don't don't like to acknowledge as being, hey, here's the things we can do. We can do this, this and this. And one of them is we can expel you if you do these things. But it is there. It is there as a kind of if if if this goes as horribly as we can possibly imagine and we can no longer have this person in the organization, in the community, in the collective, then expelling them is is an option. And for most anarchist groups, that will be part of how they how they can resolve these kind of conflicts. As I said, worst case, but it is still there. So I think that that potential for expulsion is is something we maybe don't want to be doing, but it's something we recognize as anarchists that there may still be a necessity for that at certain times. And I think it does raise a lot of issues of, well, where does that person go? Right. Does that person just is that person just out in the wilderness now? Are they how how are they going to learn from this? How are they going to change? Does it really does it really change the underlying structural situations around things like like sexual assault and violence? How does it help us transform as a community? It raises a lot of questions, but it is still still an important part of trying to deal with conflict and deal with justice and more more anarchistic ways. And maybe because this might lead to forms of misunderstanding as well, because when you talked about part one within these constraints about autonomous parts must operate in coordination with other autonomous parts, and you framed it in a way that points out that you have your freedoms, I have my freedoms, and as long as they don't infringe on each other, it's all fine. But the part within the book about autonomy very much highlights how individual freedom is a product of collective freedom and not vice versa. And and I think this is just something that I would like to add, because it might otherwise lead to misunderstandings. When people hear you talk about these individuals and not infringing on the freedom of others, because this is, of course, one of the ways that it is being conceptualized. For example, in liberalism, you have these nomads, these individual nomads that are enacting in contractual relations with each other and very much thought of through a lens of methodological individualism. And that's not the way that you approach it, I would say. Yeah, definitely. I think that that's really important. So when we do look at something like those sort of restrictions on individual autonomy, it's not coming from that methodological individualist starting point. It's very much saying any kind of individual freedom is a product of the collective existing, of being part of a community. So it's not that you have these autonomous individuals who come into an organization and then have to coordinate. It's that the organization or the community produces the kind of autonomy and the freedom that these individuals have. But part of that process of producing that freedom is a coordination so that the sort of freedoms and autonomies are kind of balanced and work together and don't conflict with one another. And I think that's something we see in anarchism going way back. That recognition of individuality and individual freedom are a product of community and a product of collective organization rather than the kind of liberal starting point, which is we're individuals and we can maybe for our mutual benefit cooperate. It's much more cooperation comes first. And this is also, I think, very much important because it points towards the importance of how this collective element comes about. Because if it comes about in a participatory way, then the likelihood of the individuals that are engaging with this collective of agreeing with the limitations on their own autonomy is, of course, much higher than if not. And I think this very much relates to this question of grand strategy or within the VSM. It's called system five and how these overarching goals, this grand strategy actually comes about, how it is being developed. Because this is the crucial point where anarchist cybernetics is very much different from, as I already pointed out, for example, capitalist cybernetics, because this level of grand strategy, this level five within the VSM, is very much part of a participatory process as well and needs to come about through such a process. And I think immediately some questions pop up as well, because if you think of it in a larger context, if you think of anarchist cybernetics as something that might eventually inform society wide organization, then the question of scale comes into mind immediately. Because if you want the level five elements, the grand strategy elements to come about in a participatory way through consensus decisions, for example, then you will have a problem if you have a large quantity of people and you will have to find ways to address this in a way that still leads to this legitimization through process that is actually a constitutive element of anarchist cybernetics. So how would this level five function, this grand strategy come about within anarchist cybernetics also on a scale? Yeah, so I think one of the best examples I think of, well, I think the starting point is thinking, well, what is this system five? So what is grand strategy? So the way I understand it and the way it's stood in cybernetics is thinking about the identity or the ethos of a particular organization or particular community. So what are the kind of core principles? What are the, what is the sort of paradigm or worldview of a particular community? What is the core elements of how that community views itself and understands itself as a community with a certain identity? And that's because that embodies things like, you know, values and principles, thinking about, you know, that sort of functional hierarchy of decision making. You know, that sort of, that system five level of, or grand strategic level of values and principles, identity, that then determines what kind of practical strategies are going to be developed in an organization, which then in turn determines what kind of tactics are going to be appropriate within the organization. So there's a strong link between the day to day activities and how they are considered to be appropriate for the organization and the kind of identity and the ethos and the values and principles that that organization has. So how that actually comes about in anarchist cybernetics is really, really, really important question. There are elements of it which are, which make up an almost a kind of common sense within a particular, you know, political milieu or political tradition. So some of it's going to be things that maybe isn't ever, ever even explicitly discussed or isn't even ever, you know, the subject of an actual concrete decision that people make. It might be that the people involved come into an organization or come into a setting or decide to form a kind of community or just want to think about who are we as a group. We already exist as a group, but let's think about who we are as a group. There might be things that are just so taken for granted that they never have to be a decision made about them. They're just a common sense almost. So, for example, you know, thinking about, again, going back to the example of the Industrial Workers of the World Trade Union, you know, part of the sort of common sense, the sort of taking for granted common sense of that organization is the particular political view of economic exploitation, right? There are, you know, wealthy capitalists who own the means for production, and there are the working class who have to sell their labor in order to survive. I think if you go to a IWW meeting, even a big sort of strategic meeting today, they're not going to be saying, okay, do we still agree with this? Do we still do it? Do we need to reaffirm our agreement to this principle? That's just the kind of common sense for that whole politics. So that's part of their identity, part of their worldview. But there's going to be elements of it that do need to be discussed at some point. And I think one of the fruitful ways of thinking about that is through things like constitutions. So you said about how groups constitute themselves. And part of that is thinking about, well, what values do we all agree on? What kind of identity do we all share as people in this organization or different organizations within a kind of federation of some kind? So that process can be quite explicit in those terms. And if we look back at something like Occupy Wall Street, they had participatory, collective, democratic processes of writing and agreeing on a declaration. So it's kind of trying to mirror the idea of the US Declaration of Independence, which was obviously written by a few white men, a lot of them slave owners, all kind of wealthy landowners. What Occupy did was say, okay, we need to create a declaration for ourselves as a community, but we're going to do that in a democratic way. We're going to do that in a participatory way, and it's going to be based on everyone taking part in that process. So that's a much more explicit way of doing that kind of system five grand strategy of saying we can define who we are as a community. We can define what our core principles are, what our values are, and we can write that in a document. So they produced the kind of declaration of Occupy Wall Street. So that was their sort of founding document. So I think there's ways that you can do that in organizations. I know in sort of smaller organizations like workers cooperatives, there's going to be some kind of constitution. There's going to be some kind of founding statement or statement or principles, which at some point in the organization, you might either need to write from scratch or you might need to, if it already exists, you know, go back to it and change things as time goes on. So those documents aren't necessarily fixed forever. They can maybe change in some ways, although some elements might be less changeable than others. But I think how you then scale that up. So it worked well for, you can imagine it working in a small workers cooperative. If there's like 10 people, you say, well, we can get together for a day and we can just work this out. Okay, great. Occupy Wall Street. Okay, a few thousand people took part in that. Still relatively small groups. And they developed really, really good ways of making sure everyone could take part, making sure everyone could feed ideas in, but still relatively small group. How do we do that at the scale of something like the size of a city or even a country? Well, then we need to think about some of the really, really interesting examples around the world of more participatory processes for writing a national constitution. So none of these are anarchists in any way, but I think they do have a lot of really important lessons for anarchism in the sense that they start to show us how a community at that scale. So, you know, hundreds of thousands, maybe millions of people can do this kind of system five grand strategy and how they can do that in a way that's more participatory than it traditionally has been done. So traditionally, a document like a national constitution is maybe written by a small number of constitutional legal experts and maybe some involvement from politicians. Maybe there's some kind of consultation that feeds into it so that the people in the country have some kind of say in it. Maybe it goes to, you know, vote afterwards for people have to approve this new constitution. But with a lot of cases around the world, there's a lot of examples of people trying to say, how can we open this process up and make it much more participatory? Involve much more people, not just in throwing ideas in and then approving the document, but actually taking part in writing it. And I think one of the examples I've studied, there's lots of others, but one of the examples I've studied is Iceland. So they went through a process which hasn't been successful yet. But it was a really interesting process nonetheless. After the 2008 financial crash, they decided to try and rewrite the national constitution. But the way they did that, they wanted it to be more participatory. They thought, well, we want everyone in the country to have more of a direct say in how this document looks, because this document is ultimately saying, this is who we are as a community. And this is what we believe in. And these are our fundamental principles and values. So they tried to find ways of making it more participatory. It still wasn't, you know, participatory in the way that anarchists would like, but it does start to point us in the direction of, you know, this is something we can do now. And we've got the tools to do this now. We can use a lot of the kind of digital tools that have been developed recently, a lot of the communication technologies. These make it much easier for lots of different people in a large area to take part in the discussion. And it doesn't need to be, you know, everyone in one big, you know, general assembly. We're not talking about having a Zoom call with like three million people trying to trying to agree on something. You can sort of decentralize this and split this up into small working groups. So it might be different parts of the community in different geographical areas have their discussions. And then they have delegates that feed those discussions into some kind of slightly more centralized council or committee. There may be different special interests groups. You might have, you know, like Occupy Wall Street did, you had People of Color Caucus so that people of color in Occupy Wall Street had some kind of representation in the decision making structures. So you can have, there's different ways of sort of organizing that kind of mass participation that's still democratic, that's still participatory. But that doesn't mean we're just saying let's get everyone together and try and discuss and agree on something. So it's a more and more effective way of doing it that kind of breaks it up in little ways. And also a process that makes sure that it's not always the same people that engage in it. Because, I mean, that's a bit of a problem with the participatory approach is that at least as societies are organized right now, if you simply say let's do it in a participatory fashion, then you will have some people that have actually the luxury to have free time in order to participate and others do not and stuff like that. So this needs to be addressed as well, of course. But OK, so I mean, what I can hear here is that you're leaning towards some form of anarchist constitutionalism in order to address this question of system five and grand strategy, actually. We kind of talked a lot about organization up until now within this conversation. But your book actually has a second part, which is not about organization, but about communication. And some might remember Norbert Wiener's book title, Cybernetics, Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. And you equally highlight both of these elements, control and communication. So maybe let's turn towards the communication part. What is it that communication does? What role does it play in anarchist cybernetics? So I think really fundamentally for cybernetics in general, thinking about self-organization is at the same time thinking about communication. So thinking about how information is gathered and processed and shared and distributed within a system is incredibly central to that. So one of the sort of primary mechanisms within a self-organized system is feedback loops. So, you know, what was talking about when I talked about the kind of steam engine governor or the thermostat, that's a kind of feedback loop. And it operates through information. So, you know, the thermostat, as the temperature in the room increases, there's the sort of temperature sensor in the thermostat that sends information to a different part of the thermostat, which turns the air conditioning on, for example. So that communication in that sense of information being taken in from the environment and shared in the system and then an action being the outcome of that information is really fundamental to cybernetics. And some of the more sort of technical and I think sort of, yeah, looking at cybernetics in terms of electronic systems and mechanical systems, a lot of the focus was on how do we make these communication pathways and channels more efficient? So how do we minimize noise in these systems? How do we ensure that information is, you know, intact when it gets to the point of the system where it needs to be? So how does it get from, you know, the sort of sensor that's measuring something in the environment? How does that information then get to the part of the system where the action needs to happen? So that's really important for a lot that's a more technical side of cybernetics, but I think it's also incredibly important in thinking about how self-organization operates in social systems. Because everything I've kind of talked about so far in terms of organization, this is all requires interaction between parts of a system. And that interaction is communication. Sometimes it will be people literally talking to one another. Sometimes it will be, you know, monitoring of different parts of the environment or what's happening within the organization. Sometimes it might be, you know, just a kind of physical interaction. I mean, one of the examples I often think of is working behind a bar. So I don't know if you've ever worked in a bar, but, you know, when you first start working with people and it's busy, you're constantly bumping into each other. You have this sort of physical and eventually you sort of learn to move around each other. You sort of have this, yeah, you kind of self-organize as a kind of system behind the bar. But, you know, that sort of physical bumping in, that's the kind of communication as well, because that's sending a information signal of, right, I need to move this way instead, or we need to go a different direction kind of thing. So all of this kind of coordination, all this self-organization is about, you know, communicating and making sure information moves through the system in, you know, effective ways that allow people to know what's happening and make decisions as a result of what's happening. So also in terms of strategy, you know, strategy can't happen effectively if we don't have, you know, information that's being communicated from the day-to-day activities and from the environment itself. You know, strategy can't happen within a kind of bubble where there's no information coming into it, right? It has to have information and that means you have to have some kind of communication, you know, effective communication systems within an organization. So in, you know, small collectives and the kind of small workers cooperative, that might be very, very simple where the communication is just we talk to each other, you know, we tell each other what's happening. We have a meeting every week where we go around and everyone says, okay, this is what happened this week and this went wrong. And so the information is shared within the system, quite simply. But if we think about sort of larger systems, we need to think about, okay, how do we create specific communication channels so that the right information is going to the right places? So the right information is collected, but also presented in the most effective ways. And also, you know, an important part for cybernetics is how do we sort of manage the amount of information? So we don't want to be flooded with too much. We need to kind of filter some stuff out. We need to dampen down some of that massive variety of information so that we can actually use it in effective and practical ways. But developing communication systems so that information can be taken and travel around the organization to the places it's needed. People can make decisions based on the right information. That's incredibly important. And that's all communication. Some of it's talking, some of it will be different, different forms of communicating information. And I think related to that, and this is also I think important in order to highlight that cybernetics itself also is not innocent. It kind of formats things in specific ways. It makes you look at processes in specific ways and thereby having certain imperatives inscribed in it as well. And some of them might be desirable, others maybe not. So maybe just to highlight this as well, that a process of reflection upon this processes of formatting within cybernetics would be useful as well. And one of the things or one of the ways that you do reflect upon this is when it comes to the specific way that information is thought about within cybernetics, because very much at the beginning of cybernetics, there is information theory developed by Claude Shannon, which does a formatting when it comes to information. And it's a specific type of formatting that has a specific idea of what is noise and what is not and what should be eliminated because it is termed noise. So it kind of introduces an idea of what is to be used and what is to be left aside and to be eliminated. And you take this example of noise in order to point out that actually, no, the way in which cybernetics looks at this question of noise is actually problematic because it eliminates aspects of the existing world, so to speak, or the surroundings that we live in. It eliminates aspects of these surroundings that are actually very much useful and fruitful and should be taken into account when it comes to the way that we approach, in this case, anarchist cybernetics. And for this, you look at different ways that noise can be framed and you develop an idea of a form of noise that actually should be part of the way that we approach anarchist cybernetics. And this is called pink noise. So could you maybe elaborate on what we have to imagine if we think about pink noise? Yes, this is actually based on some work that some people who are involved in the Indignados movement in Spain developed. So this was looking at the social media activity that was related to that movement. And what they were able to do was suggest in very broad terms that there's essentially three different types of noise in these social media communication systems. So if you imagine in terms of what I've just said about communication and information, social media is one of the ways that we share information. But if we were to go on Facebook or Twitter, it's impossible for us to see and grasp everything that everybody is sharing. There's just far too much, far too high quantity of information there. Even just if we've got Facebook with our close friends, there's still a huge amount that people could be sharing there. And it's very difficult for us to actually see and process all of that in a kind of effective way. And so what these data scientists and activists were able to do was look at the sort of, and I think it was just focused on Twitter, that kind of social media information ecosystem in a sense, and see well there's different outcomes from the information being shared. And that very much depends on the way that noise is handled within these systems. So let's say there's the sort of two extremes here. There's the kind of white noise, which is just incredibly chaotic. So there's no real, so the person looking at information isn't really able to see any kind of pattern at all. It just looks like random sort of snapshots of information. If you imagine this as different tweets, maybe you're not really able to see, okay, I can't really see an actual thread emerging here. I can't see an actual narrative emerging from this. It looks like it's just thousands of people spewing out lots of different opinions and thoughts and experiences and everything. And I can't, I don't have an overall picture of this is what's actually happening within this kind of social movement. And they say, well, that kind of very chaotic white noise, that doesn't really allow you to organize in any kind of effective way. The kind of organization that goes along with that is going to be very sporadic, very, very spontaneous, very chaotic, not coordinated in any kind of way. So it's not really any kind of actual self-organization. It's just lots of people responding and reacting and running about chaotically. At the other extreme of that, they say, well, you can have a communication system where things are highly regulated and highly organized. So you maybe have some kind of, whether it's actually a sort of central control agency that's deciding to filter the information in a very, very specific way so that you only see a very, very narrow subset of the information. That might be, I don't know, if the communication ecosystem was controlled by a political party or something, they might say, well, we've got our goals as a political party and we're only going to give you information that we think is going to be beneficial to that. So that creates a form of organization, but creates an incredibly rigid form of organization where if everyone's only seeing one narrative from the information, then that only gives them the resources to act in a very, very narrow range of ways. So they can only really act in very specific ways, which for something like a political party is quite useful because they kind of want people to be doing very specific actions. They don't want people to be doing their own thing in different ways. They want people to be very, very, very coordinated, highly coordinated and controlled. If you imagine a political party during an election cycle, they want people to be putting out the same message because that's what happened. The party needs to be happening at that moment. They need everyone to be on message, everyone to be responsible in very specific ways. But then from a cybernetics perspective, that kind of very rigid organization, everything we've kind of discussed so far today, that's not a very effective mode of organization. It might be able to hold together for a very short period of time, but ultimately it's too rigid to be able to respond to any kind of change effectively. So ultimately it's going to either maintain itself through very direct control of the people involved or it's going to break down because it can't respond to a changing environment. And so a very sort of narrow control of information, these people sort of suggest, produces or is more beneficial to that very, very rigid form of organization. So you have these two extremes, the white noise, which is very chaotic, very sporadic, no sort of coherent narrative. And if people have that information, that's going to lead to very spontaneous, very chaotic action, not coordinated action. On the other extreme, you have very, very controlled, very rigid narrative in terms of information. And that's the kind of brown noise. So very kind of solid, coherent noise. But it's one narrative, it's one sort of channel of control in a sense, and that either produces or reinforces or is beneficial for very rigid, very top down, very controlled forms of organization. In between these, you have something called pink noise. And that's where you have a sort of balance between these two. It's not dominated by one specific narratives, the information isn't filtered. So there's only one narrative coming through, but it's not as chaotic as the white noise. So what you have in the information is you might have a series of narratives that are a bit more autonomous and a bit more self generating. But there is a sort of coherent set of narratives. So you as a person looking at this information can see, OK, I can see what's happening here. It's not so chaotic that I don't have any idea, but I'm also not only getting one narrative. I'm seeing different things and I'm able to, through seeing these different things, understand what's happening. I can actually use this information effectively. And so these people who are involved in the Indignados process are able that kind of noise in a system. We have some kind of coordination, but it's not super rigid. That produces or reinforces the kind of self organization that we've been talking about today. Because people are able to see from the information, OK, I can see that this is useful, this narrative is useful. We can use that or that's relevant to us. We can draw on that and that allows us to organize. And I think that's really important because it's very, very speculative and it's very vague. It's not, you know, prescribing a specific way that information channels can be organized or that systems should be designed. It's very, very vague. But it is saying there is a relationship between how information is organized and filtered and how that information can be practically used or developed on or built on. So if we have information that's in the form of a kind of pink noise, where there's some sort of differentiation, some variety, some sort of diversity in the information, but we can still pick out coherent narratives or coherent stories coming through from the information. Then we can act on it in constructive ways. We have the resources from that information to be able to self organize. While you're talking, I'm kind of trying to figure out whether or not people might actually be able to understand what you're talking about, because if I'm not mistaken, the way in which you use the term information is already a very specific one. You have a high degree of information if the signal is actually not that clear, if there's a lot going on beyond the actual content of the signal, so to speak. So that's high information. And this is something that you now, based on these researchers, try to inspect a bit more closely and try to take a look at whether or not there might be something useful in it and actually stating yes, there might be. If it's not too chaotic or too stable, but presents itself in a way that is already again maybe formatted or presents itself in a way that strikes a balance between the two, then it should be incorporated into the organization of the structure, additional to what would be termed in the classical information theory, the signal. So I think this is something we need to kind of point out towards the audience, because it already operates on the level where this idea of information theory and what is signal and what is noise and what should be rejected and whatnot is taken for granted. And I believe that most of the people are not familiar with that. But maybe you could correct me if I'm wrong. Did I get that right? Yeah, it's incredibly, incredibly difficult, I think. And it's something I'm not 100% convinced I've got my head around, because when we think of information, we think about the content that's communicated. So if I give you information, I'm telling you something and there's a certain content there. And in some of this early information theory, that wasn't what they were talking about. And that makes it really, really difficult to work out when some of these authors and people like Stafford Beer, who were to some degree building on their work, are talking about information, it's difficult to often say, OK, what exactly are they talking about here? I think the sort of most useful way of thinking about it is thinking about what this means in practice for us and what noise means in practice. So as you said, noise in a communication system is normally the thing that we want to eliminate. So if you imagine that it doesn't happen now, but in the past, when you turn the TV on, there might be a certain amount of static, that sort of fuzzy, white, staticky noise and the image that went with it. And you would try and, going back quite a while, you would try and adjust your TV aerial so that the picture comes through and you don't have that static, fuzzy noise. So you're trying to eliminate the noise. You're trying to say, well, we want the signal and we don't want the noise. And obviously that's great for TV, right? Because we need that. Because we wanted to see the signal, we wanted to watch the TV program at that moment. Or on radio, it still works in exactly the same way. But I think what a more critical look at noise and information allows us to do is say, there's always a kind of built-in logic to doing that. So it's fine if we're trying to find a particular TV station or a particular radio station. And we want that specific and we know what it is we want. We can filter out the noise, we can adjust the dial or the aerial, and we'll get the signal that we know we want. But often in terms of communication information, that's not the case. We don't know what it is we're looking for. We're trying to learn something new. Someone trying to tell us something that we don't know what it is already. So when it's actually people sharing information, we need to be much more careful about what we're eliminating. So if we're thinking about social media, OK, the noise doesn't look like, you know, white, fuzzy, static. The noise instead looks like, well, I've got a timeline of tweets that I'm scrolling through and I can't work out what's important, what I need to focus on, what I need to put my attention on, and what is just kind of, you know, useless advertising or stuff that doesn't interest me. And it's very difficult to tell. So when we're scrolling through, it's very difficult for us to work out. This is something I need to be looking at, and this is something that has no relevance to me, isn't relevant to what I'm interested in or what I'm wanting to do in the world. I think one thing we have to be careful with noise in is thinking about, OK, are we filtering out things that just don't make sense to us, but which could actually be really important for us? You know, so we have to kind of be aware of, like, you know, we don't want to end up in the echo chamber where we're filtering out things that, oh, well, I don't really agree with that, but I'll filter it out. And then I'm actually missing a huge part of the picture of what's happening in the world. But the other really big danger is that how things like Facebook and Twitter and other similar platforms operate is they are already filtering out a lot of what they think of as noise. And that's incredibly political. It's like anyone who scrolls through their Facebook feed now will see, OK, there's a lot of adverts, right? There's much more than there was 10 years ago. Now it's like every two or three items on a news feed is a sponsored advert for something. And we haven't always decided that we want to see that, right? The algorithm that Facebook has and the fact that there are companies who pay money for that advertising, that's what decides what filters through the noise, right? So things that we might find really important are filtered out by these corporations, essentially, in order for us to see what they think is important, what they want us to see, the advertising, for example. And a lot of political content is being filtered out in this way. So a lot of stuff that is very relevant to the political and economic situation we find ourselves in and to learning about that and to trying to change that is being filtered out by these systems in favor of sponsored adverts, spam, celebrity gossip, things like this. So thinking about that sort of information and noise stuff, I think the technical side is really interesting because it's fun to try and get our heads around how people were using these terms and what they were meaning and why that was important for what came afterwards. But really, the interesting thing is, well, what does this mean in practice? And if we're talking about how do we filter noise in a communication system, given that for us, the main communication system now is social media still. The fact that there's corporations like Facebook and Twitter and then all the companies that are paying to advertise, that sort of corporate process is what's doing the filtering. It's not something we have any control over at all. So we might need to have some filtering, so it might just be too much. We can only look at a certain amount of stuff and actually process it mentally. So we need to do some kind of filtering. That's fine. But it needs to be something we have control over. So there needs to be some kind of, and again, this is incredibly speculative, there needs to be some kind of way that the algorithms that are doing the filtering are somehow subject to some kind of democratic control. So that even though we know what we're getting is filtered, the noise that's filtered out is something we've at least agreed to. We've at least said, yeah, I've had some democratic say in how the algorithm operates. I know why it works. It works in a way that we think is politically and ethically beneficial. So the filtering is fine. It's like an email spam folder, which actually filters out the spam. That's fantastic, right? Because it allows us to only see the emails that are important. So we need to have something like that, I think, for these kinds of social media platforms. Absolutely, we do. So the decision over what is seen as noise and what is not is absolutely political. I would definitely agree. And maybe this would lead us into a different terrain. Maybe I would add that even before that, one would have to think about the things that are not information and not communication and provide ways in which they can be included in the processes that we use as organizational processes as well. Because if you only consider communication and information, this is already a form of filtering as well, I would say. But this is a different topic, I would say. In order to enable the kinds of communication anarchist cybernetics relies on, you stress the need, and this was implicit in your answer right now already, you stress the need for alternative social media platforms. So maybe you could give us a sketch. What could they look like and what are the functional elements that they should provide? So I think the question of what kind of communication systems are functionally useful for the kind of self-organization we've been talking about, it's both really, really important but also incredibly difficult to start to do, I think. So when I started looking at this topic, and this was in 2011 around the Occupy movement and things, and at that point still, there was a lot of hope in social media. So still at that point, there was a lot of criticism of it, but it was still a sort of idea that things like Facebook and Twitter can be productive for a kind of radical politics. I don't think anyone believes that now, I think. Now we're really in the sort of dystopian nightmare scenario of how these platforms have developed and the ways they produce mental health crises and conflict and political outcomes is much bleaker now than it was 10 years ago, although I think a lot of that was probably even on the horizon then. So I think it's quite difficult to imagine what kind of platforms would be better than them, what kind of platforms would work that would fulfill some of the same functions but do so in a way that is much more conducive to a kind of radical anarchist politics and the kind of self-organization that's involved in anarchist cybernetics. I think I also have to preface these kind of discussions with saying that I'm not a platform developer, I'm not an app designer, I don't know anything about computer coding or design or anything like that. So it's my sort of perspective on it is very much for the kind of political and organizational functions that these kind of communication systems would need to have. I think there's a lot of different ones in terms of thinking about, well, what does self-organization look like in practice for anarchist collectives and social movements and also at a larger scale of things like participatory and democratic constitution making. What do those things look like? And then how could a platform help facilitate some of that? Because I think that's something that comes through in Stafford Beer's work a lot. So when he was writing as far back as the 1950s when computers were still in their infancy, but even then he was clear in saying, well, the way computing is developing is it's not developing in the direction whereby it's going to be helping us do the sort of basic functions of a human society. It's helping us make work more efficient maybe or helping us produce more and do more in terms of our working lives. But it's not necessarily actually helping us communicate as a society or share ideas or share knowledge or things like that. So I think that's the important thing is what sort of perspective or starting point are we coming from with thinking about technology? And it has to be how does it help us do things like self-organization? That said, it's still incredibly difficult to work out exactly what that would look like. And I think the reason for that is there's quite a strong disconnect between platforms that have been developed, that are very, very successful at the sort of more practical or functional side of self-organization. So we have things like Lumio, for example, which is developed by Workers' Cooperative. It's designed specifically to help cooperatives and sort of movements and communities that are organized in cooperative and democratic ways to help them function. And it does that very well in terms of the sort of technical and functional aspects. It's a fantastic platform. But what it doesn't have is the kind of social aspect that something like Facebook or Twitter still has. So there's a reason that a lot of the alternative social media platforms are things that have branded themselves as alternative social media platforms that have been focused on activists in some way or focused on activist organizing. I think there's a reason that not many of them have actually been successful because they haven't effectively mirrored this sort of social dynamic. So one of the things that I think is incredibly important and also one of the sort of dangers of something like Facebook or Twitter. I feel like I'm already very sort of old school with this, talking just about Facebook and Twitter, because I know there's like a host of new platforms like Twitch and stuff that people use in TikTok. That's just sort of outside of my sort of wheelhouse. I think I'm feeling very old when I talk about social media now even, which didn't feel that way 10 years ago. But yeah, if we look at these sorts of platforms, the reason they're successful is people socialize on them. People spend time with their friends on them. People make friends on these platforms. They're not just communicating in very functional ways. Something that we think is incredibly important is people are wasting time on these platforms, which is what you do with friends, right? When you get together with your friends, you don't say, right, we're going to organize something here. We're going to do some detailed, very efficient organizing. You might do that, but most of the time when you get together with your friends, you're having stupid conversations. You're telling stupid jokes. You're just not really doing anything, just wasting time together. I think that's actually incredibly important for how we build relationships. It's like you're getting together to not really do anything, to just sort of be together. I think things like Facebook and Twitter work great for that, and they exploit that, right? Because you then become addicted to it and you get drawn in and they channel that activity in very specific ways. But that's the real challenge, I think, for some kind of alternative platform. It can do all the functional stuff for self-organization very, very well, but it's still not the kind of place that people want to actually hang out and spend time. Or it's much more difficult to use those platforms in that way. I think that's the big challenge is, well, A, how do we sort of mirror some of that to get people away from these sort of mainstream corporate platforms that are channeling information in specific ways and producing behavior in very specific ways? How do we get them away from that, but still keep that social aspect? Because people aren't going to just give up because I think people who give up on social media are fantastic. I think these are brilliant people and they should be lauded for their ability to do that. But for most of us, that would mean no longer having contact with a huge number of our friends because I've got friends all around the world. And if I wasn't seeing them post memes and jokes on Facebook, I'd probably never have contact with these people anymore. I think that'd be really sad. So it is like, how do we mirror the social aspect? How do we make these platforms things that people want to spend time on, but also that people don't become addicted to, that people are able to say, OK, I can do this online and it's fun and it gets me some great contact. I have some great friendships that can build relationships, but I'm still doing stuff outside of that. That's not my entire life because that in itself is very, very damaging. That's sort of been being solely locked in on a kind of digital platform or that sort of mode of communication. So I think that's the real challenge in terms of less about the sort of specifics of the architecture now and more about how do we have something that fulfills that social function and that does that in a way that doesn't exploit us or doesn't take advantage of the fact that we need that social content. And when it comes to the coordination part of things, I mean, this would be an interesting aspect as well of a potential platform. You are right now very much focusing on like a functional equivalent to classical social media, so to speak. But I mean, it would be very interesting to provide platforms that are able to facilitate these processes that are actually important for anarchist cybernetics in terms of coordination, in terms of decision making, for example, helping with these questions of grant strategy, with coordinating different activities on different levels, all of the stuff that will be an essential part of effective self-organization, so to speak. And I think this would be an area where alternative platforms will be of help and need to be of help as well if we consider the question of scalability that we talked about before. Yeah, definitely. And I think that's where we have seen the most sort of promise in terms of alternatives. I mean, I think that the difficulty is that although a lot of this sort of development work, developing web platforms, it feels very accessible and very democratic because all you need is a computer and you just need the time to do it and to learn some of the coding and things. Actually, the platforms that work well and that are effective and successful cost a huge amount of money to develop. So even something like Lumio, which is probably the most successful in terms of something that's designed specifically to support cooperative type ways of organizing, it was still relatively small budget compared to a big social media platform, but it was still quite a lot of money and time went into it. So there's still that big barrier to, I think, fully experimenting with different platforms. So even though it feels like, well, we can just try different things out, there's a lot of barriers to actually doing that. But I think that's where there's the most sort of promise, as I said, I think it is, I mean, Lumio is the success story here because it is, the functionality is fantastic. It works really, really well. What I think is really important is it integrates with other platforms, which is really important because I think the way I sort of characterize it in the book is a bit too much focusing on, can we create one platform that can do everything? And I think that the sort of reality now is, well, can we actually have a handful of platforms that integrate together? So you're not having to have, for example, you know, Lumio, which is essentially a kind of forum type sort of format where you have different threads within a forum and different subgroups. People can be members of different groups, which is really important. It also allows for decision making. So it has different models of decision making built into it. So people can make proposals within a thread and, you know, they can be subject to consensus or majority or whatever. But there's different democratic mechanisms within Lumio for actually making decisions as well as just having discussions. But, you know, if we were thinking about, well, how can that be the sort of complete package? We would say, well, you know, given so much of the work that we're doing now is online or distance or working from home. Does Lumio then need to have a kind of video conferencing functionality built in? I think that's where it would get incredibly difficult to develop a single platform that actually has all of that functionality because it would maybe be a very, very, very, you know, server intensive platform, which would cost a lot to run, cost a lot to develop. So is it better to think, OK, we can have other platforms like Jitsi, for example, which is, you know, kind of open source video conferencing platform. You have things like Framapad, which is a kind of, you know, again, open source version of Google Docs, something like that. Can we just integrate these platforms together better so that we're not having to constantly be going, OK, well, we'll use this platform for this and this one for this. And then we've got really important information in two different places. Can we just have these integrated somehow rather than being the one platform? But how do we just create that kind of synchronization so that we can maybe work primarily within Lumio, but then go to a different platform for the video conferencing? But we're still accessing it through Lumio somehow without having to completely go out of that ecosystem. So I think that's where is the most sort of practical potential is sort of how do we network between different platforms to provide all these functions. So things like, you know, having discussions that are, you know, productive and effective and moderated in fair ways, that everyone has a chance to speak, but that we can also make effective democratic decisions that everyone feels they've had a genuine chance to take part in, where we can, you know, store documents for agreements that we've made, that we can quickly see, OK, this is who agreed to what. These are the agreements that we made as a group. We can quickly check back on things where we can where we can. One of the core functions of the viable system model is being able to monitor what's happening in the organization. How do we build that into, you know, is that already in Lumio? Do we have that functionality there? Do we need to maybe build on that? Do we need to bring something else in that can where we can have that monitoring and be able to easily see it where it's transparent and people don't feel that it's that they're just being monitored by a kind of algorithm or something. So I think that's those are the kind of difficult questions at the moment. Yeah, and I would definitely agree that it needs to be a combination of different approaches. So I think in some situations, there might be already existing alternative like Jitsi. I think this is a very good example. OK, we do not need to invent another open source video conferencing platform, but it would make sense to integrate it in in the platform that tries to provide it all as a user experience, because this I think is pretty much important that it would be very helpful if we had one platform that is able to provide these different services in an open source kind of way. Plus X plus additional services that do not yet exist in an open source fashion. So I'm not sure if we did this already sufficiently. It's difficult to say. Actually, we have this example of the movement of the squares. You also gave an example when it comes to a cooperatively run cafe. But still, I think there is a layer, a level when it comes to anarchist cybernetics that we kind of touched upon, but did not yet spell out in full. I mean, this probably will not be possible. But still, I would be interested if if we take a look at the level of society as a whole, where could we go from here? If we if we consider these insights of cybernetic of anarchist cybernetics and if we try to extrapolate these insights into a future that that is also on a society wide level organized along these principles of anarchist cybernetics. So how would that look like? And how how would a process that that tries to make use of these insights look like? How could this brought into existence in order to get to a point at which to quote Allende, at last, the people are in control? So I think one of the most interesting sort of examples along these lines is the mutual aid networks that grew up during during the covid pandemic. So obviously these these were, you know, depending on where these happened and who was involved, they were more or less radical in different ways. But this was a moment which I think anyone obviously no one anticipated that some people did anticipate the pandemic and they weren't listened to. But, you know, nobody really expected it to happen. But also, I think no anarchists expected the sort of term mutual aid, which is something that comes from Peter Kropotkin's work, which is a really, really strong part of the anarchist tradition. For that word to suddenly have this massive, massive global currency and loads of people using it and thousands upon thousands of groups around the world and using using this term. So that was really, really interesting that that sort of happened and nobody expected it. But it is the kind of thing, I mean, that, as I sort of said said earlier, you know, when these anarchists like Kropotkin were describing the kind of societies that they wanted to build, they weren't just imagining these. They were saying, well, this is how things have worked in the past, or we can see examples of it already happening. We should do more of this and mutual aid is one of those examples. So, you know, Kropotkin says, well, mutual aid is happening all the time. We're constantly helping each other in a kind of mutual way without the need for payment, without the need for sort of any kind of direct compensation. We just help each other collectively. That's a normal thing that, you know, humans do, other animal species do, plants do. So I think how those mutual aid groups developed is really, really important because these were by and large very autonomously organized. So there wasn't, I mean, one of the failures of government was that there wasn't any kind of coordination for those first few weeks of lockdowns in a lot of countries, definitely in the UK. There wasn't any central coordination. It took a long time for government to actually think about how they need to be supporting people during something like, you know, lockdown. And so these mutual aid groups emerged, you know, semi-spontaneously a lot of the time with people who already had experience or already had worked together in similar things to try and make sure people's basic needs were provided for. So ensure people had food if they weren't able to leave the house, ensure that people had social contact, you know, guaranteeing that people could get medication that they needed if they weren't able to go to the pharmacy. So a lot of these kind of, you know, basic functions were being provided by groups of volunteers, you know, people getting together without any central coordination quite autonomously, you know, often making decisions in very democratic ways. You know, networking horizontally with other groups nearby. So it was really interesting to see how this happened. And I think that's the kind of thing that is the most concrete of thinking about what could this, you know, anarchist cybernetic stuff, what could this look like at a kind of larger scale in the most immediate term. And I think it's building on those kind of mutual aid networks. Now a lot of them ended up, you know, falling apart when they were no longer directly needed. A lot of the time governments came in and started to take on coordinating roles. A lot of people in the sort of NGOs and charities started to sort of take more leadership type coordinating positions. So the mutual aid groups often weren't radical to begin with. But it was definitely a sort of process of de-radicalization, moving away from something that could be seen as this is potentially an alternative way we can start organizing society, start looking out for each other collectively. Definitely moved away from that. But there's still that sort of germ there of, well, we did that, you know, two years ago at the start of these lockdowns. So there clearly is that potential in societies to build these kind of autonomous self-help communities. And cybernetics is, I think, really essential to working out how they can be at their most effective. So the kind of things I was describing with the viable systems model and John Walker's work in particular for thinking about how something like a cooperative or like an anarchist type collective could use the viable systems model to help them design their own processes and design their ways of organizing and ways of working. Mutual aid groups could be doing that kind of thing so that they can actually be more conscious and more aware of this is how we are at our most effective. This is how we need to be organizing to be doing what we want to do, to be providing the kind of support that we want to be providing for each other. And I think that has the potential to say, OK, we can do it in this, you know, small aspect of our lives. Can we just start organizing public services in this way? Can we start, you know, we managed during COVID to ensure that everyone had access to medication. Well, can we maybe just organize that kind of logistics network for distributing essentials like medication? Can we organize that in a democratic and non-hierarchical way? You know, we did it during COVID. Maybe we can do that more generally. So maybe those mutual aid networks give us the sort of framework to start thinking about this is how we could be reorganizing society in different ways. Again, the question is how much of that? It remains to be seen what the legacy of those mutual aid networks is going to be, because it's still very fresh and we're still in the very unusual circumstances of coming out of the pandemic or potentially still going into just the next phase of the pandemic. But I think that's potentially in the long term. What's the legacy of the mutual aid? Can that be something we build on to think about how we coordinate the various functions of the lives that we have together? And there's a last question that I ask all of my guests, and that is, if you think about the future, what makes you joyful? I think that's a fantastic question, and it's one that I'm going to be very, very bleak on and say nothing. I think at the moment we're in, it's hard to see much hope. So even though I was talking about mutual aid and there's potentially the possibility of expanding that to how we reimagine society and reimagine the way we live and work together. Having the hope that that's going to happen is a very different question, I think. I mean, just the situation we're in as we're recording this, you know, where the UK is facing 40 degree temperatures for the first time. There's, you know, big parts of the world of having up to 50 degree temperatures that have never had that before, really. It's just terrifying how bleak the future is and whether there's the potential of stopping that kind of, you know, dramatic and catastrophic climate change, or whether we're at the stage now of we need to try and minimize it maybe and somehow come through the other side in some way as effective working societies. Whether that'll happen, I'm really not sure and not very hopeful, sadly. And also, you know, what we're talking about in terms of the digital platforms and technologies. I mean, the temperatures that we're seeing around the world now, you know, electrical circuits start melting, technology stops working. So is this slightly a kind of fantasy we're indulging in? Yeah, I apologize. That's incredibly bleak note to end on, but it's where I sort of feel at the moment, I think, sadly. No need to apologize. Everybody can answer whatever he, she or they might with this question. So this is absolutely super interesting to me to hear as well. And I have to add, you're not the first one to not being positive about this question. So this is absolutely a valid answer as well. Yeah, I think, I mean, one thing that is, I think, a sort of change in my lifetime that seems to be just going in the right direction, I think, is if I see how much more adept people are now thinking through things like gender and sexuality. I mean, that's just incredible. If I think back to the experiences that I saw when I was in school and how, you know, homophobic it was and then hearing from friends who are teachers, knowing about how young people nowadays are dealing with things like gender and sexuality. I mean, that gives me a lot of hope. That's incredibly encouraging to just see those dramatic, dramatic advances in such a short space of time. So that's one thing to be hopeful about, perhaps. Nice. Thomas, thank you so much for being part of Future Histories. Yeah, thank you so much for inviting me on. I really, really enjoyed this. And thanks for taking the time to read the book and come up with such interesting questions. I really, really enjoyed discussing that. And I really, really appreciate the time that you've put into going through the book and giving it so much consideration. Well, I'm happy to. As I said before, I immensely enjoyed reading the book. So thank you, too. Thank you so much. That was our show for today. Thanks a lot for listening. If you want to support Future Histories, you can do so on Patreon. For this, visit patreon.com slash future histories. Or you can simply tell a friend that you like the show and that he, she or they might like it as well. Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks. 

Episode Keywords:

#FutureHistories #FutureHistoriesInternational #Podcast #JanGroos #Interview #ThomasSwann #Anarchism #Self-Organization #Cybernetics #Autonomy #CentralControlStructure #Decentralisation #OrganizationalCybernetics #WorkerCoopertives #Activism #AnarchistCybernetics #Platforms #StaffordBeer #ViableSystemModel
