# FH Complete S01E32 - Daniel E. Saros on Digital Socialism and the Abolition of Capital (Part 2) | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories. My name is Jan Gross, and what you are about to hear is the second part of an in-depth interview that I did with Daniel E. Saros on digital socialism and the abolition of capital. We are about to dive in even deeper into Dan's proposal for a socialist mode of production with its own socialist laws of motion, all of which he describes in great detail in his book Information Technology and Socialist Construction, The End of Capital and the Transition to Socialism. If you did not listen to the first part of the interview, then I highly recommend that you do so. Not only because it's super interesting, but also because today's episode kind of builds on the last one. I wanted to point the German-speaking audience to another episode of Future Histories that is concerned with the question of a socialist planned economy. And that is episode 19 with Jan-Philippe Dabrich. And I wanted to guide all of your attention towards a book that I believe to be a fruitful, if not necessary, complementary read-to-dance book, and that is Refiguring Revolution, A Critical Theory of Social Transformation by Eva von Redeker, translated from German by Lucy Duggan. I hope I'm pronouncing this right, Lucy. Sorry if not. You'll find the link to the introduction of Eva's book in the show notes. And I mentioned this book because Information Technology and Socialist Construction, so dance book, is concerned with answering a specific question. And that is actually still the question that had been asked in the historical socialist calculation debate. Can there be an intrinsically socialist mode of production that organizes its economy around autonomous socialist laws of motion without the need for markets? However, we do indeed need a revolution in order to get into the position of implementing such a proposal in the first place. And luckily, Eva von Redeker wrote a book about what this actually means, a revolution. If we turn away from this idea of a revolution as this one defining moment where the powers that be are overthrown and everything changes all of a sudden, but instead look towards an idea of revolution as a praxis and as a process. And this is why I do believe this to be a great complementary read-to-dance book. And I am very much looking forward to talking to her soon for future histories. I'll keep you updated. Before we finally get to the interview, thanks a lot to Kai for your support on Patreon and thanks to Bernhard for your donation. But now, please enjoy the second part of the interview with Daniel E. Seros on digital socialism and the abolition of capital. OK, so maybe let me summarize a bit because I think this is, of course, a lot to take in for the listeners as well. All at once, the different layers and different approaches within the proposal. There is this general catalog, which could be seen as some kind of socialist Amazon. Let's say it's a huge catalog of use values, goods or services where I can consume by placing my use value, the one that I want to purchase within my needs profile, my personal needs profile. I would have to go to work in order to get credits. So that's just one of the things that is being expected of me. I would have to go to work. But within this work, I'm organized in a democratic way in a workers council that everybody who's working at this socialist enterprise is engaged in. So this will be organized very, very differently from from how it is being done today. It would be some kind of democratic economy actually on on every layer possible. So then there are incentives in place within the system for me to make a plan of what use values, again, goods or services, I probably will consume next month, for example. And if I plan good and indeed purchase most of the things that I placed within my needs profile, I am eligible for a bonus because I through communicating my needs early on, I helped with with the planning of the whole economy and made it easier for everybody. I will still be able to purchase items I did not plan for. I think that's very important to say, but it's just better for me and for everybody else, as I said, for the for the functioning of the economy if I try to plan as good as possible and think ahead a bit. And so then the products are being produced based on me registering my needs within the general catalog. But there's a crucial question that comes up for me that I think I did not yet fully understand, because how is the information of me ordering, let's say, 20 packages of milk being translated into points? It cannot be just the quantity of 20 of 20 packages of milk. So it's 20 points because if I ordered 20 cars, then this this would, of course, be a whole different kind of thing. So there must be some kind of mechanism in place to translate my needs into points that has some kind of base in how many resources actually went into the production of this good. So how is this being managed? That was a huge question for me. Well, each use value would have a base unit, I guess. So if we're talking about one package, you said one package of milk that, for example, you could select that place it in your needs profile, depending on where you place it. That'll determine how many points are assigned to it. So if you place it higher, more points would be assigned to it. And if you place it lower, fewer points would be assigned to it. You could put in a whole block of use values, 20 packages, like you said, and you could arrange those consecutively in the profile or you could spread them out. If some of them you don't feel like you need quite as much, you would rank them lower, others higher. So the Workers' Council that posted that use value in the universal catalog, general catalog, would be notified of the points that it can then use to acquire inputs to produce that use value. Yeah, go ahead. As far as I understood it, at the end, the points will be communicated throughout the system from the registering of my need in the general catalog. The Workers' Council will get a certain amount of points that it will then use to buy inputs in order to produce the product. And this will go on and on and communicate throughout the system up until the resource of oil or wood and stuff like that. But if the weight that is communicated through me registering my need in the needs profile is quantified only by how many items I purchased and where I positioned it in the needs profile, then it does not communicate how much resources went into the production of that given use value. Are you saying the consumers need that information? Well, the whole system needs this information in order to be termed rational. Because otherwise there would be the chance of excess production where the Workers' Councils, if they just react to the needs of the people and the needs are translated into points, but not in a way that is anyway related to how much resources are put in, then there's a discrepancy there. Well, you've asked an excellent question here. First, I think this situation is somewhat unlikely to arise because much of what we observe in terms of relative valuations in the marketplace and capitalist societies is likely to reproduce itself in a needs-based socialist society. So that is a package of milk will be ranked much lower and have fewer points assigned to it in most needs profiles. But let's suppose for the sake of argument that the use values do have a similar ranking for some reason. In that case, the Workers' Council that posted milk, for example, would receive more resources than it needs in the point allocation process, and it can virtually return the inputs during the point allocation period if it's receiving more than it needs to meet the current needs. Once the current needs are addressed, however, this process can be repeated for the allocation of inputs for investment purposes. Investment could mean expansion in new facilities. And if milk is valued as highly than such expansion for the purpose of increasing the amount of milk produced might be a logical use of this large amount of resources. Resources could also be used for product development and innovation, which might also be a good use for them. Even so, if the Workers' Council believes it's receiving too many resources beyond even what it can productively use for investment, it does have the option to virtually return the inputs during the point allocation process before it actually receives those inputs. Finally, let's suppose that all these adjustment factors that I've described fail, and the Workers' Council that produces milk decides to use its large amount of points to acquire many more resources than it will use productively. And then at the same time, let's suppose that a Workers' Council that produces automobiles ends up with far fewer resources to meet the current needs. And so this could happen, to come back to your initial question, this could happen when automobiles and milk are ranked at the same level in the needs profiles. It might lead to far too many resources being devoted to milk production, not enough to automobiles. In this case, the Workers' Council that sells the automobiles, it will be producing too few automobiles because it doesn't have sufficient resources. And so it's going to raise their prices and credits because the general rule for pricing in the socialist society is to aim for the steady and complete sale of automobiles during the point allocation period. So because they don't have that many automobiles and there are a lot of consumers wanting to buy these, that's going to cause the Workers' Council raise those prices. So the rise in prices, of course, is going to frustrate the consumers. Some will not be able to make the purchase at all. And so those consumers will then raise automobiles in their needs profiles relative to milk. And the Workers' Council produces automobiles will gain points. So this process should continue until enough resources are devoted to automobile production that prices for automobiles begin to fall. And so in this way, I think the system will automatically work to correct this imbalance. But it may take time. But just like in a capitalist society, it takes time to shift resources from one industry to another in response to changes in consumer preferences. That's a very interesting answer. And I think it relates to a kind of even bigger question. Since you do not have, as it is in a capitalist society, one unit of account, such as money, you come into a position where you kind of need to establish some kind of balance between credits on the one hand and points on the other. So the underlying assumption, as you just explained, it is kind of that that through these different mechanisms of pricing, ranking within the needs profiles and the question of how many resources can be used in general in order to give away points established through the Council of Scientists. These are the different elements that are thought of bringing about some kind of balance within the system. Do I get that right? Yes, I think you've actually hit on a very important point. And it's something I haven't mentioned previously in the interview. That is that it is a moneyless economy that we're talking about. There is no money, not in the way that we know it. The points don't have, I mean, this is a minor point, really. The points do not have any physical substance to them. They're simply electronic. But more than that, points aren't spent and received by someone else. It's simply a signal that's communicated from one worker's council to another, and that is then used to acquire inputs. So there's no money involved in the allocation of means of production to different worker's councils. Now, there are credits, at least in the socialist phase, although in the higher phase of communism, the communist phase, as I'm calling it, there aren't even credits because at that stage, people use their points from their needs profiles, consumers do, in order to acquire use values, because the distribution principle at that point is to each according to his or her need. So even the socialist credits go away. But in the lower phase of communism, in the socialist phase, the credits do seem to resemble money because use values have a price. Credits are received by workers for their work, and they receive credits for bonuses when they've registered their needs and then made those purchases. So those credits are used to acquire use values. Now, that appears to be money, but the major difference there is that the credits, when they're received by the worker's councils that sell those use values, they don't use those credits for any purpose. Those credits actually, they vanish. They don't persist in any form. They're not spent again. That's how the system is set up. This is an important point because when credits are being distributed to workers and to consumers in the form of bonuses, that increase in the amount of credits in the system could be inflationary, could lead to hyperinflation, in fact. Once they're spent, however, because they cease to exist, that leads to an automatic reduction in the total amount of credits that are out there in circulation or not in circulation, but in people's hands. And so there's an automatic sort of way to control this total supply of credits. And it prevents hyperinflation and or inflation from really developing. So the way I've described the use of points in the system, the use of credits, it's very different from money. And yet there's still a logic to the system that allows for the rational allocation of inputs and I think the rational distribution of use values to consumers. OK, just to make it super safe that I got that right, the elements that serve primarily to guarantee this economic rationality would be on the one hand the price and on the other hand, how the consumers rank their needs within their needs profiles. Because I think my confusion from earlier about the points was addressing a question that I had on how the worker councils, how the workers councils would be incentivized to use their resources, their scarce resources of nature in an efficient way, how that would be established. And as far as I understand it now, I think you say that the answer to this would be that they would be incentivized to use their resources efficiently since there's some kind of price pressure coming from the consumers as well. And if they just act recklessly with the resources, with the points that they are being allocated, then this will feed back into the system. And by that you have some feedback circles that are both communicating the necessary information on what is being scarce and a way to avoid non-efficient use of scarce resources. Do I get that right? Yes, I think that's right. I think the one thing I might add is that what I would regard as efficiency in this kind of a system isn't really the same as what we consider efficiency in a capitalist system. So even though there's a rationality to it in the way that resources are allocated, I don't think that the system is set up to pressure workers to work as long and as hard as possible. I think there's space for other considerations that would allow workers to take into account the speed of work, the nature of their work, and not let efficiency in the capitalist sense be the only sort of value driving what they do. But it still involves rationality in terms of clear rules for the distribution of the inputs, the means of production, and then also the final use values. I'm so glad that you say that because I'm actually split between a dual role here as an advocatus diavoli on the one side, where I try to imagine the arguments that critics will bring up and they will ask for economic rationality. And on the other side, of course, I totally advocate for different ideas of rationality when it comes to what this means within, in this case, a socialist mode of production. And actually, I thought of two ways how to address these as well, because you could easily, within the needs, within the general catalog, you could easily put in other factors that will be taken into consideration by the consumers when deciding up on which product they will put into their needs profile. You could put in the question of what is now called externalities, like the extraction of ecological resources. And the other one would be, for example, happiness of the workers within the workers council. You could put in a anonymous way of feedback on the happiness within the council. And then, of course, I would prefer to purchase a use value from a workers council where people like to work. And this is a super important thing to communicate in such a system, I guess. And it's totally lacking right now. Sure. I'm so glad you raised this point, because this is one of the features of this kind of needs-based socialist system that is supposed to elevate our consciousness, make us more socially aware. And the general catalog will include a lot of detailed information about each use value that we don't normally have access to. And a lot of it includes things like the conditions under which the use value was produced, as you said. And so consumers will be able to take that into account. So social movements like movements for animal rights and environmental protection, those kinds of movements will still play a very important role because it will encourage people to rank certain use values higher in their needs profiles based on what they're hearing and learning about the conditions under which these use values are produced. So glad you raised that point. One big question that came up is that you very much depend on the category of the proletariat as a force, actually. As a political force and as the barrier of these revolutionary ideas. And of course, this brings up the question of whether this proletariat actually still exists as a category, especially in terms of class consciousness. Is this in the 21st century still a thing? Well, I think that this proletariat, as we call it, it does consist of people that have very different living standards, very different occupations, and so on. But the one aspect that all proletarians have in common, I think, is that they cannot live unless they sell their labor power. And that characteristic hasn't really changed. So they don't have sufficient wealth to guarantee that they can live from ownership of wealth alone. And so for a change in the mode of production, these people would need to recognize this shared characteristic and then take this kind of revolutionary action to change the mode of production. It won't be easy, but I think it's a necessary condition. It would require a huge amount of cooperation and coordination across a very diverse group of people. Very diverse. But it's the necessary condition, I think. And also, on the other hand, I think, of course, it sounds kind of old school, the category of proletariat, but the category as such didn't diminish. And I think because things are getting worse and worse and billionaires are getting trillionaires and the rest is getting worse, I think there's room for raising class consciousness again. And there's an attractiveness to that as well, I guess. I have one more on the category of freedom and individual I see. And this is aiming at the inner structure of the workers councils. At some point within the book, you mentioned that there will be a monitoring of the fulfillment of your work responsibilities and that these will be communicated by system administrators. I think even at the end of the day, you're right. This seems a bit much, I guess. But besides the question whether or not it will be every day, there's first the question of elitism as well on the hand of the system administrators. And then this kind of brings up questions of, you know, ugly situations between the peers in quotation marks that have to surveil each other in terms of how good did you work or how bad did you work and stuff like that. So this could get ugly, I think. Sure. No, I had something a little different in mind. In terms of evaluation within the councils, the efforts ratings subcommittees would consist of workers who are members of the council. That would be a rotating body. And, you know, each council could decide on its own how frequently it wants to rotate membership in that subcommittee. Those effort ratings would involve adjusting the annual income maybe once a year. When I said that the or when I wrote that the workers council would communicate to the system administrators at the end of the day, what I had in mind there was just that work had been completed that day. Nothing more than that. And the reason I actually said per day was because whereas currently workers have to wait to receive a paycheck, maybe two weeks, possibly longer, in this system, there's no reason to delay. Workers can be paid immediately at the end of their work day. It's just a matter of making sure that since these system administrators actually are the ones that grant the credits, they would need to be notified that membership is still current, the worker still works as part of the council. That's all. It's not supposed to be a method of evaluation or something that would be withheld for poor performance. Yes, I didn't have that in mind. OK, maybe there could be a rotating element as well to the system administrators. So there is no power accumulation in their hands, actually. I think that's a good idea as well. There are some areas where I ask myself if your proposal might run into reproducing errors of the current political, economical system. The first one is about the role of competition, which I struggle with, I have to say, because I find competition to be one of the evils within our society many times, I think, not only, but most of the times, I guess. You state that a classless society can be expected to be quite competitive. I think, actually, this is kind of problematic, because I'm not sure if this doesn't reproduce a conception of humans as a species that needs to be disciplined and supervised. I do get the point that the proposal should not be utopian. I said it before, and that other non-competitive proposals do have a omission here and often retreat to overly positive interpretations of how things will naturally fall into place somehow. But still, I'm not convinced of the large role of competition. Could you maybe explain why you decided to approach things that way? Yeah, I want to emphasize that competition would play a really minimal role in the kind of socialist society that I'm describing. There wouldn't be competition between workers' councils, not directly any kind of competition in terms of income determination. I mean, this would all be minimized, I think. Where there is competition, I think, and where I find it hard to eliminate competition, is in terms of workers trying to obtain membership and councils to perform specific kinds of work. If one of the guiding principles is from each according to his or her ability, then I think that it's important that workers and young people who are entering school and trying to gain admission to an educational program, let's say a young person wants to become a doctor, they're going to need to compete with their peers in order to secure those spots in those programs, or to secure a spot in a workers' council to do the kind of work that they want to do, because they have to prove that they're able to do it. That's really all I'm imagining for competition, and I find it hard to let go of that as a principle that would need to be in place to ensure that people do demonstrate ability. Yeah, I understand that, I have to say, because it's kind of a check as well, that if somebody who really, really, really wants to become a doctor, but is just simply really, really not qualified to become one, then one has to be somehow honest about it and find a way to evaluate whether the person is qualified or not. And I guess it's a fact somehow. There's another element of competition, though, that I spot and wanted to ask you about, and that is if a workers' council decides to produce a product, and they post it in the general catalogue, and other workers' councils are also posting a similar product, then people might decide to purchase it from the one that builds it from aluminium and the other one that produces it with plastic that is not being purchased. So the needs will be fulfilled, but not mostly from the company, or the socialist enterprise that uses the plastic, in my example. So there will be some kind of competition with regards to that, and that might be spotted through when people purchase what, where, and then you might have an indicator on what is more popular, or you have a rating system as well, or a feedback system, where people leave how they like the product or not. So there will be some indicators, and it's good to have these indicators because they are helpful in order to organise the production as well. But this also introduces an element of competition, I guess, between the worker councils. How is this conceptualised and used, maybe? Yeah, that's a great question. You're right, you're right. It could be interpreted as a form of competition between the worker's councils. One council may find its point allocations dwindling, and another's point allocations are increasing. This could create tension between those councils. You're absolutely right. I think one important point maybe is that the compensation for useful work isn't going to be effective. So it's less likely to lead to resentment between those councils, at least for that reason. And if one council is finding its point allocation diminishing to the point where the council needs to dissolve and the other council is expanding, there's no reason why the expanding worker's council couldn't say or encourage the former members of the other council to join them, join the council, since their enterprise is expanding. They don't need to come up with financial resources to pay those workers, because that isn't how it works. All they need to do is invite them to join the council to become members, and they'll be entitled to their credit income. As long as there's work for them to do, they can merge and resolve it that way, in a cooperative kind of way. So I think you're right. I think there are elements of competition that don't disappear. But I think the underlying principle is cooperation in what I described, I think. Yeah, I would agree, actually. And I think the main reason for that is that the profit motive is eliminated. Because of that, you are incentivized to help the other much more than if it would be a competition for profit. And of course, and that may be utopian on my part, if you have a society that is organized around the principles that you described, the hope is that one would internalize these different kinds of values as well. And since there is no striving for profit, then you wouldn't be incentivized to stab your peer in the back. But you could easily, and without a loss for yourself, just coach the other cooperative how to produce it differently, that it might fulfill a better standard, and stuff like that. And I really liked that in the way you described the proposal when you were writing about the internalized principles of the capitalist mode of production. Because it's not just about the formal rules that we can have in laws and stuff like that. But capitalism also functions through the way that I internalize how the system is working and how I will have to behave in order to produce a likely outcome. And this is kind of sucked up with baby milk. You're formed around these expectations as a person as well. And it's likely to expect that within the socialist mode of production, there would be different types of values that are as well internalized that are more formed around the value of cooperation, as you said it. And so it becomes the question of how likely is a certain type of behavior being made? And I like that, actually. Yeah, I think that's a great point. And one of the central, I think, insights of Marxian theory is that people's consciousness is actually transformed depending upon the mode of production that governs society. And so we can't even imagine, I don't think fully, how much people's consciousness would be transformed if it moved to this kind of society. The value system, as you say, everything would be different. People would just think differently about everything. And hopefully in ways that are much healthier, much better. There's a second question relating to the question of reproducing errors that I have. At some point in the book, I had the quick flash where I was thinking, oh, hoppala, this might be a reproduction of this there is no such thing as society phrase of Margaret Thatcher. And I'd like to quote you here in order to explain what I mean. The quote is in his 1844 critique of different varieties of communism. However, Marx wants that what is to be avoided above all is the reestablishing of society as an abstraction vis-à-vis the individual. The individual is the social being. And then there you end the quote of Marx. Therefore, it is only necessary to identify the manner in which the individual in a socialist society must interact with others to fully develop his or her species consciousness. Because the market is deemed anti-ethical to this cause, it must be replaced with a new mechanism. And then, of course, you go on to describe the mechanism. But still, I was asking myself if you're talking about a kind of individualistic approach that more or less mirrors this. There is no such thing as society phrase from Margaret Thatcher, but just in a socialist manner somehow. Maybe I'm not phrasing this correct, but I hope you get the point. No, I do think I know what you mean. What I'm imagining is that the public functions which I've described, like the system administration, the work of the Council of Scientists and so on, would become sort of merged with all other processes in society in a way that doesn't seem like the state exists as something separate and standing apart from society. There still would be these public functions, as I've described them, but I think the transformation in the way people relate to one another would allow those public functions to become sort of subsumed or just part of society instead of standing apart or us imagining those state functions as being separate or apart from society. I hope that helps. Yeah, I think I know what you mean. It kind of points to the question of withering away of the state. Yes, that's right. And I don't think these public functions would wither away and disappear. Those are still going to be there. Yeah, but it wouldn't be a state that is apart from us somehow. Yes, that's right. That's exactly right. I was wondering if we might run into problems of promoting quantification if we handle certain aspects of your model the way that you described it. Because if, for example, care work and stuff like that, education and things like that would be a part of the general catalogue and would be handled throughout the mechanisms that you described, then they would be handled in a way as if they were quantifiable, even though these areas are having an internal logic that is not adequately represented in terms of quantification. And that's a problem that we do see right now where neoliberals try to reform the health care system along the lines of quantification, and they, to be frank, fucked it up. And we do not want to replicate this idea of an overarching principle of quantification within these systems. So how would you handle that? Yeah, it's a great question, and maybe this society would encounter problems in trying to extend this principle to these areas. I'm willing to allow for that possibility. However, with care work, for example, the one possibility would be that if a family decided to perform that work themselves, maybe designate one person in the family to do that work, then it would be possible for that person to receive compensation for that work, and they would just do what they would do in the home. There may be workers' councils that specialize in care work, and in that case, to include that in a needs profile, it would just be necessary for the workers' council to post in the general catalogue a unit of that service, like maybe an hour of work. That could then be moved into the needs profile. The workers' council specializing in care work would receive the point allocation according to that and then could obtain the inputs that it needs in order to perform that service for those people who registered and need for it. So I think things like care work can be handled. Again, maybe it would encounter problems I'm not seeing, but at least I think we can imagine a way to do it. With education, that's also a difficult one. And like you said, I haven't filled in all the details in the book. Others are going to have things to say about this, hopefully, and they may have ideas on how to make this work. But I at least have some ideas regarding education. I think that it's easiest, I guess, probably to start with an example where you have a, let's say, an educational program that trains workers to do a specific type of work. Well, if that's the case, they're going to be producing some kind of a use value in the future. And so whatever the current registered needs are for that use value could be used to determine the point allocation for that educational program or that educational institution. Those points then could be used to acquire inputs, whatever is needed in order to educate students in that program. So maybe I am overreaching. Maybe I'm saying, hey, this can apply to everywhere. But I think we can at least think about how it might work. Now, if for some reason we ended up rejecting as a society, if we ended up rejecting it because it somehow doesn't work well, we should be open to that, I think. But I think we also should make the effort, if we really do want these to be the guiding principles of our society, from each according to one's ability to each according to one's work initially and then to need later, then it makes sense to try to do it. And also, I think there will be some kind of mechanism for infrastructural work for like roads or trains and stuff like that. And you could easily say that, OK, education as well is a basic infrastructure that we all need. And of course, it is also important to have some moonshot projects. It won't work that you will always know what kind of education you need, because it's good to have some education that does not have a specific use just because you might just not know what use it will have in the future. So it's an investment that still makes sense because you might foster insight into areas where you do not yet know that they will be of use in the future. So that's like an infrastructure, a knowledge infrastructure somehow as well, no? Yeah, you picked up on the fact that I chose the easier example when I chose an educational program that's aimed at producing a use value. Yes. And so that's more complicated. And so like the more basic education is, you know, we'd have to think through how could we maybe make that work. And it may be that in those situations, we pull the points from from many different areas in order to allocate points to those educational institutions. I mean, we may be able to do it that way since, you know, those institutions may be teaching just basic science. Maybe we can pull points from lots of workers councils where that's where knowledge of science is relevant. There might be ways to do it. That's just something that our elected representatives are going to have to work out and determine how to make that work. But I'm not sure there's any other way that we can just say right now exactly how to do it. Yeah, there are ways, at least. Yes, I think in order to to get a sense of how this proposal could be beneficial for all of us, let's engage in a thought experiment. If there had been a socialist mode of production and socialist laws of motion in place in the way that you described and in your proposal in the U.S. During the corona pandemic, how would that have been beneficial in your opinion? Well, I certainly don't want to suggest that all human problems will disappear with the transition to this new mode of production. But I can think of a couple of benefits. First, I think that people will rank basic needs very highly using their needs profiles, including the need for medical care. So many of society's resources will be devoted to health care. And so the strain on this sector should be reduced in a situation like this. Also, I think people are going to be accustomed to thinking about others and less about just kind of doing business as usual. So, you know, people have made a great effort to engage in self distancing. But I think that you would see even more self-sacrifice in this kind of a society. In addition, we wouldn't have powerful interests spreading false information to ensure that the economy continues to grow rapidly. People's health really would be sort of the top priority, I think, in a situation like this. And that would be helpful. And finally, the profit motives would not promote this shameful mistreatment and widespread abuse of animals, I think, that exists in capitalist societies. So these kinds of pandemics, I think, would be less likely to probably occur. The likelihood of diseases originating from oppression of animals, I think, would decline significantly if we transitioned to this other kind of way of living. And I think also because of the historical examples of planned economies, people will immediately say, oh, we know that planned economy, that's a super slow apparatus and they won't be able to react that fast in the case of a pandemic. And then you need ventilators, but the state apparatus is so super slow, so they won't be able to do anything. I mean, you're proposing a very, very different kind of system that is actually much more decentralized and has very different base assumptions. But how would that relate to this fear of not being able to react fast? This isn't something I gave that much attention to when I was writing the book. One point that does come to mind that I did address, which is somewhat similar, I think, has to do with natural disasters. So if there was a natural disaster that caused a large part of the population, let's say, to lose Internet access, it might be possible to set up the system so that immediately those needs profiles of those people transitioned to kind of a more general one that would focus on addressing their most immediate needs first. And then society's resources, point allocations would be redirected towards meeting those needs immediately. So there might be ways to build in kind of emergency responses into the system. Again, I think the system is very flexible. There are ways to sort of to work on those problems in ways that I don't even think I've fully thought about. And also, I think, again, the question of the profit motive is very crucial here, because in the in the case of a pandemic or any disaster, actually, if you do not have the profit motive that hinders the collective forces of all humans to work towards a solution, then you will be better off, I think. I mean, we saw that people were hoarding masks and stuff like that and holding them back because they thought they would get some profit out of it later on. And people needed these masks, of course. And so so this is just destructive behavior, I think. And there would be there wouldn't be an incentive to to behave in ways like that, I think. OK, I think it's also important to at least tease the idea of how we could get to implementing the proposals that you are describing in your book. So there there has to be some kind of idea towards a transition phase and subsequent implementation of what you're trying to do here. Maybe let's just take a small country like Austria, where I live right now, as an example. What would you propose in terms of a transition? What would this look like? How to proceed? Well, the sort of revolutionary transformation that I'm talking about really won't work unless it's broad enough to include major industries. So if it's small, then workers councils will be they'll be forced to rely on markets to obtain inputs and they're going to need to obtain currency. And that means selling products as commodities. So this transformation is going to have to be very broad, very expansive for it to take hold. I do think that one nation could transform the mode of production, but it will have to rely on international trade to some extent. So I provide some suggestions in Chapter eight of the book regarding how this might work. So like in some cases, consumers might register a need for a foreign commodity that is not available domestically. The workers council that posts that foreign commodity would receive points to produce something. It would use the points that it receives to produce something that it can trade as a commodity for the foreign produced commodity. So there might be ways to still obtain goods from capitalist nations while transforming your mode of production domestically. But still, I think too much reliance on commodity exchange is going to undermine the momentum of this shift to a new mode of production. So that those are at least some some thoughts about how one might do one might pursue such a transformation in a small country. But obviously, the smaller the the experiment is, the more obstacles it's going to face. And apart from small countries, what are the couple of steps that you would propose if one wants to get on the pathway to a transition in general? Yes. So it would be necessary first for individuals to start communicating their needs using needs profiles. And workers would need to start actually posting use values in a general catalog. So all of this can start before any kind of revolutionary transformation takes place. The infrastructure is there. It would just be necessary to actually start setting it up. This would also be a good time to be educating people about how this system is going to work. People are going to have to understand if they're going to actually move forward in trying to implement this. Only after all of that is really kind of in place, would it then be possible to use it to start guiding resource allocation, to have workers actually take control of the means of production and so on. And I mean, you know, it would it would require also a political movement. Workers and consumers would would need to support political party and candidates for office who would actually want to try to pursue these kinds of changes. So I think those are the things I see happening before there's even any abolition of private property or private ownership of the means of production. These things would we need to take place first, the educational effort and the effort to actually start setting up a general catalog and needs profiles and so on. That's super interesting. So if I understand that correctly, this would mean that you would necessarily have a hybrid version before and that we could actually start now to build this hybrid. Like the like a shadow economy, actually, with a needs with a general catalog where only use values are posted that are being produced. With certain standards like only use values from cooperatives, for example. So and if it grows and grows and grows and grows, then you would be more and more able to rely for most of your daily purchases on the use values of the general catalog and that it would like that you would be able to fade out your purchasing via money and substitute it through purchases that you do on the general catalog. Am I right? Yes, that's right. The one thing I might add is that what is posted in the general catalog during this phase might also include commodities produced by capitalist firms. So not just like workers cooperatives, there would need to be protections in place for workers to actually do this because capitalist enterprises may not want their commodities listed there because they know where this is moving. And there's going to be resistance. So that's why protection from the state for these efforts would also need to be in place. And that's why the political movement is important, too. Can't just do this and not expect capitalist interests to kind of look the other way. They're not going to like this. They're going to resist. And so, yeah, so that's the thing I would add. So, I mean, we actually pressed you on quite some topics already, but still, I'd like just to generally ask you, because we talked about the shortcomings of market socialism and we will talk about Paragon, another proposal soon. I'd just like to ask you as well. What do you think are the shortcomings of your proposal? Yeah, I'm glad you asked me this question. It forced me to critique my own proposal in more than I have, I think, previously. But some use values, I think, are easily incorporated in needs profiles and others are not so easily incorporated. For example, shoes, you know, are easily included, whereas something like housing is more difficult. I mainly hope to promote discussion of this proposal because I think there are many intelligent thinkers who are going to be able to think through some of these difficult questions. I view what I did is mostly initiating this conversation, not as providing any kind of final answers on all of these questions. And you pointed out, and I think rightly so, that there are certain use values and certain kinds of services like care work, education. These are going to be difficult to include. So that is a shortcoming, I think, but maybe one that we can overcome by trying to work out the details. The other shortcoming, I think, is that it might lead to complications that I just have not anticipated and that perhaps no one can anticipate. I mean, what we're talking about is such a radical and drastic change in the way we live that there's no way to know completely how it would play out. So, you know, these complications that come up, they could make the system unworkable for some reason. I'm willing to acknowledge that possibility. However, I also think that we're approaching the time where we must have an open discussion about alternative economic systems if we're going to address these global environmental challenges that are really threatening all of us at this point. Now, of course, you are not the first one to propose an alternative political economy since the socialist calculation debate took place. There have been others before and you discuss an approach called participatory economy or short paracon at length in your book. How does paracon differ from your proposal? And since it is already being practiced, where and how is it being implemented today? Paracon was developed by Michael Albert and Robin Hanell in the early 1990s and has been developed quite a bit since that time. Paracon is a non-market participatory economic planning model that aims to promote remuneration based on effort and sacrifice and production. So that's one of the similarities, I think, to my perspective. It also involves council democracy, and so it includes workers councils and consumers councils that contribute to the formation of the annual economic plans. Their planning process involves something called an iteration facilitation board. It announces so-called indicative prices with the councils submitting plans. And then the prices are set to account for social costs, not just private costs, the way market prices do. The prices are also iteratively adjusted to clear markets, surpluses and shortages. Workers in a paracon society also work a variety of jobs as part of a so-called balanced job complex. So that is that workers are assigned a mix of jobs, with some of the jobs being more empowering than others. This is a significant difference from my proposal. I don't have an element of this really where job complexes are formed and involve a balancing of empowering and disempowering tasks. But the idea is that this approach is supposed to ensure that a class of workers never arises that only performs disempowering work and avoids the rise of a class of workers that specializes only in coordination and what Albert and Hanel call a coordinator class, which they think could easily arise and has arisen in socialist societies of the past. They also think a set of values should underlie the paracon economy. So these values include things like solidarity, equity, self-management, diversity. There have been paraconish experiments that have been initiated in different countries, including Finland, Sweden, the UK, and the United States as well. Robin Hanel has a forthcoming book actually on democratic economic planning. So in terms of what I think the shortcomings are, these ideas had a major impact on me. So I really want to emphasize that much of the socialist proposal that I developed in the book built on their vision of a participatory economy. And so I have great respect for them as visionaries. I have several objections to the paracon vision, however, that I think distinguish my proposal from their proposal. So first, I think that the participatory planning process involves a trial and error method of adjusting prices that resembles the early suggestions in the socialist calculation debate. And I really wanted to kind of move away from that. I think we need a more dynamic and organic method of organizing the economy. I also think that the balanced job complexes do not do enough to protect freedom, to pursue the occupations that one enjoys the most. So I also deviate from that there. I think from the phrase from each according to one's ability is more likely to be achieved if we allow workers to compete for jobs on the basis of ability. As I was mentioning earlier, I also think the emphasis on a moral basis of the system is problematic. And that, too, is something that makes my perspective, I think, different from a lot of thinkers on the left. This sort of skepticism about objective morality. I don't think we should try to pursue values or ideals that are detached from sort of objective conditions. That's sort of how I think about it. Instead, we should be focused on ending capitalist exploitation, which I think is something we can discover through an analysis of existing conditions. And so we should be focused on that rather than sort of striving for these these value ideals. But even so, even with all that said, I think Parakhan offers features that I find to be attractive. And again, they really influenced me in the development of my proposal. Great. And what I was actually a bit surprised to see is that you didn't really cover the proposal by Cockshart and Cottrell at length. Maybe I was surprised because I did an interview actually with a PhD student of Cockshart before in Germany. So I was a bit familiar with the ideas there. And because it's one of the more prominent proposals out there for some kind of, let's say, digital socialism, I was expecting to read more about it. But you didn't cover it that much. I do see differences, of course, mainly in the decentralized access. So how do you relate to the proposal of Cockshart and Cottrell and how is yours unique in relation to this? Well, yeah, I would say that the really embarrassing truth here is that limitations on my time were the reason that I did not investigate it in detail. I had to make some choices and Parakhan was the one that I decided to really devote attention to. I think that what makes mine unique is that it grew out of my work on Marxian theory. And this point is really quite subtle. You can see it if you compare my work on Marx's theory of the turnover process of capital with my breakdown of the socialist circulation process into five phases. I use a timeline to do that in the book. And it really did. It emerged from my close analysis of reading capital volumes one and two in particular. And, you know, so for this reason, I think that I like to think and maybe I'm wrong, but I think that I've developed the only vision of the socialist mode of production that is really consistent with Marx's theory of the capitalist mode of production, which is quite a strong claim to make. But since it emerged from my study of Marx's capital, I think I can make that claim. I don't think the other alternatives achieve that. Finding a substitute for that movement of capital that I described earlier and that's found in volume one of Marx's capital. So, yeah, I'm afraid I don't have much more to say in terms of my relationship to Cockshott and Cottrell's proposal. But I think comparisons would definitely be worth investigating in more detail. Yeah, to me, it seems as if you were more striving for a kind of organic socialist law of motion and that Cockshott and Cottrell seem to be looking for, and I'm being polemic here, seem to be looking for a perfect plan that can be computed. You know, and that's very different from from the way you approach things in a very basic level, on a very, very basic level, I think. So the book came out in 2015 and now it's five years later. So I think there might be some development on different ends, not the least technological. So Amazon got a hold of more and more and more and more of our lives and economies. And by doing that also kind of engages in a proof of concept when it comes to the question of general catalogs. So they are, for example, doing things like giving you a better price if you subscribe to certain products. So that kind of reminded me of the idea that you should plan ahead and put in your needs in the general catalog and stuff like that. So some of these things are already being done, but in a, of course, capitalist fashion and within a capitalist mode of production. What has changed in these last five years? What did disprove or prove your proposals to be right? Yeah, you've asked an interesting question here in his review of my book, actually, which appeared in the review of Radical Political Economics. John Willoughby has dubbed my proposal Amazon Socialism. I don't know if you encountered that. Yes, I read it. I read it. Yeah. I found that to be amusing that he called it that. And I think you're right. I think there are elements there that are similar to what I described. So it has a massive offering of commodities that I think suggest or shows that we have the technical infrastructure to to make it a reality. We can have a general catalog that has a massive amount of use values and the specifications are clearly listed in great detail. But it's still commodity production, ultimately, and that and it represents capital in motion. And in that sense, what Amazon does is nothing like what I've proposed. So there's definitely an element there that's similar, but also it diverges significantly. And and there are some things, too, that are that would be, I think, emphasized in the general catalog that aren't emphasized, you know, in Amazon's listings, for example. You know, for example, like the date range for the purchase in order to qualify for a bonus, things like that. Those are, I guess, elements that that don't really apply in the realm of commodity production that do apply in the socialist proposal. So all the question of environmental destruction is not listed on Amazon as well. It's just called externality. But did you read the piece by Evgeny Morozov in the New Left Review called Digital Socialism? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. OK. Because he he talks about your proposal at length as well. Yes. I was really grateful for that review for that, at least that analysis of what I what I wrote. And I think it helped gain attention for the proposal. Yeah. And he's pointing out the need to socialize the means of feedback production, I think, is the phrase, because when you talked about Amazon and how it is different and how it still might be helpful, I think that's a that's a point to emphasize. It's there is a technological infrastructure of means of feedback production. That is actually the basis for why you say that this proposal is possible now and it hasn't been before. No, I think that's the circle. How we get to the to the beginning of the interview that you state that Marx wouldn't have been able to see this solution. And by that, it was kind of clever not to engage in what would have been a utopian speculation at the time. If you would have wanted to sketch the these ideas of how socialist mode of production could look like. And so he refrained from it. That's kind of one of one part of the argument. Yeah. Yeah. And I think if we if we don't accept what I've said here, then what is it that Marx did? And was it just I don't know, like some people believe it was just a big lie. But why? Why? Why is it the lie then? Because I mean, if you if you provide a super good analysis of the capitalist mode of production, it's still some it's good work, you know? Yes. It's something. Yes. And so so that made you know, it could leave us though with a very depressing sort of conclusion that what Marx did was this extraordinary analysis of capitalism. And we're all condemned forever now to live in a society based on class exploitation. There's nothing we can do about it. You know, that is so that is so depressing. So I think a lot of people don't want to think that way about it. So instead, they say, well, he was wrong. He just got it wrong. You know, it's kind of the system's contradictory or whatever. You know, the transformation problem proves he was wrong or whatever. I mean, the deterministic idea of how the like how the phases will one lead to another and then there will be this revolution and that was wrong. But that doesn't mean that the analysis of the capitalist mode of production was wrong. I mean, it's not that easy. But I think this is one of the main benefits that I got from reading your book is that I do not believe that we have to suffer this exploitation for the rest of our lives and into eternity. But there are different modes of production that can be achieved. And this is actually that this this leaves me optimistic and not depressed, I have to say. Well, that's great. I'm so glad that I wanted to I wanted to complete the story somehow. This is this is what could emerge from capitalism and and it's a future that that can give us hope. Yes, but it's not it's not it's not a completion, though. It's a it's an opening, I'd say. Yes. OK, then at the end of each of my interviews, I always ask the question. If you think about the future, what makes you joyful? Well, I think this idea that that one day everybody might cooperate within this global system of production and distribution is such an exciting possibility. In the society that I've tried to describe today, you know, everyone's needs are given equal weight in the economic process and no one takes advantage of others for material gain. It's hard to imagine, you know, with all the problems facing our our world today that we could live in a society like that. But I think actually it's become easier to imagine than ever before. We just we need to have this conversation. And, you know, I'm so grateful that you initiated this and that you're willing to share these ideas with the people of Austria and with people everywhere. So I'm deeply grateful to you for doing that. Thank you. Well, Dan, thank you so much for taking the time to be a part of future histories. 

Episode Keywords:

#FutureHistories #Podcast #DanielSaros #JanGroos #Interview #Planwirtschaft #Society #Democracy #Communism #Planarchy #SocialistCalculationDebate #Hayek #Marx #KarlMarx #PlanningDebate #DigitalSocialism #Socialism #PlannedEconomy #AssociationalSocialism #DemocraticPlanning #Revolution #HeterodoxEconomics #Marxism #Parecon #RobinHahnel #MichaelAlbert #FutureHistoriesInternational
