# FH Complete S02E58 - Søren Mau on Planning and Freedom | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Gross and it is my great pleasure to welcome Sören Mao in today's episode. Sören is a communist philosopher and author of the brilliant book Mute Compulsion, a Marxist Theory of the Economic Power of Capital, which I enjoyed reading a lot. And by the way, it's also available in German under the title Stummerzwang, eine Marxistische Analyse der ökonomischen Macht im Kapitalismus, published by the great Karl Dietz Verlag. So go and get it. More recently, an essay by Sören titled Communism as Freedom has been translated from Danish in multiple languages actually, so it's available in English as well. Both of these works, the book as well as the essay, are relevant for the conversation you're about to hear. Before we start, I'd like to thank Lukas, Fabian and Wilfried for their kind donations and welcome Markus, Daniel and Jakob as patrons of Future Histories. Thank you so much. And then some quick social media news. You can now follow Future Histories on Blue Sky as well, so go and follow, I guess. And since I never mentioned it before on the podcast on air, there's also a Future Histories newsletter you can subscribe to. So you might do that as well. But now please enjoy today's episode with Sören Mao on planning and freedom. Welcome Sören. Thank you. And thank you so much for inviting me. Sören, I'm absolutely convinced that freedom and security are two crucial pillars that must be positively occupied when constructing alternative political imaginaries. So I was extremely happy to see you make such a strong and very clear-minded case for why communism is freedom. Could you explain to us why communism is freedom and why security is part of the package as well? Well, I think that for me, freedom is kind of like the guiding principle for thinking about how to organize a communist society. And maybe the reason for that is that, or it has to do with what I think the problem with capitalism is. I wouldn't emphasize, first of all, that it's an unjust system of exploitation or that it's alienating, for example. But I would argue that the most important reason why, or the thing that's first of all wrong with capitalism is that it implies domination, that it's an enemy of freedom, that capitalism is an economic system that prohibits people from living the life they want to live. And that's what I write about in my book, Mute Compulsion, that capitalism is a system of domination. So it kind of follows from that critique of capitalism that we should think of an alternative to capitalism as a way of avoiding domination, as creating a society with the highest possible degree of freedom. So that's how I think about what communism should be. So that's my guiding principle to think of a society with the highest degree of freedom. So in that sense, I think freedom is the first and most important principle maybe of communism. And how does this relate to the question of security? Well, I think security is a condition for exercising freedom that we want to be able to exercise in a communist society. So in that sense, it's also a presupposition or it's a fundamental thing about communism also. In the sense that only on the basis of existential security and an absence of fear of not being able to sustain oneself, freedom can develop. That's kind of the reason I know. One of the primary aims of a communist society would be to secure unconditional access to everything that people need to live a good and stable and healthy life. And just as an additional follow up in terms of the definition of freedom. So the way that you described it before, it was very much related to an absence of domination. Are there other aspects of freedom that you would stress when it comes to this huge and fundamental question of what this actually means? Freedom? Yes. Well, I like the definition of freedom as absence of domination, but I would also and I think this is maybe just another way of saying that actually that freedom is intrinsically connected to democracy or is a democratic idea in the sense that human beings are by nature social beings and human beings are also natural beings, a part of nature and are dependent on the earth and the earth belongs to no one and therefore to everyone. And that means in a sense that we are by nature political animals and that the question of how human beings relate to their conditions of existence is necessarily a political question. And because of that, I think that freedom is not just a question of the relationship between the individual and the political community or political institutions. And that would be like the modern or liberal notion of political freedom, that freedom is a question of the absence of political institutions from the point of view of the individual. Freedom also has to consist in being able to participate in making decisions about the necessarily common aspects of our lives. And in that sense, I think freedom is inherently a democratic ideal. And since you mentioned this logic that you apply when it comes to the question of human nature or humans relation to nature, I think it would also be maybe a useful aspect to point out that when it comes to this idea of freedom, as far as I understand your idea of it, it does not entail a certain naturalized idea of that there was a human subject as an essence that should be kind of brought into full fruition, so to speak. At least that's how I understood it, that you are opposed to this notion of a naturalized kind of free individual that is suppressed by the conditions that surround them. Yes, that's right. So one way of putting it would be to say that there is no natural in the sense of an immediately given way for human beings to relate to their conditions of existence. It's always a political question. So it's up to us. So communism is not an exercise in trying to discover the authentic natural ways for human beings to relate to their conditions of existence. But communism means establishing the political conditions for actually making decisions about how we want to relate to our collective conditions of existence. And there's no natural way of doing that. It's always a political decision. And there's no subject that should be liberated beneath that, right? Exactly. Okay. So we will get to the point where we kind of dive a little bit deeper into the way you imagine the set up for how communism might bring all of these things about. But before we do so, I would first like to address a different layer of abstraction, so to speak, which I believe to be of great importance for the way in which we think about alternatives. In your book, Mute Compulsion, you argue that Marx's critique is not aiming to provide an alternative political economy, but that he instead criticizes the field of political economy as such and the implicit assumptions and concepts that are baked into it, so to speak. So what are the elements and functional logics of the field of political economy that Marx criticized and what does this critique mean for the way in which we think about alternatives to capitalism today? I think that probably the most fundamental gesture in Marx's critique of political economy is to historicize. So the problem with the field of political economy is, first of all, it's a historical way of thinking about capitalism or about the economy. So I think that's the most important shift of perspective in Marx's critique of political economy and his critique of capitalism, to view the capitalist economy as a historical reality, as something that came into being at a certain point in history for certain historical reasons that we need to uncover and explain. So another way of saying that is to say that the problem with political economy is its economism, its tendency to, and that's something that you also find in mainstream economics today and also, I would say, much political science, the often implicit idea that the economy is a separated sphere of society governed by its own distinct forms of rationality. I think Robert Brenner puts it very well, he writes somewhere that historical materialist accounts of capitalism begin by denying the existence of a transhistorical economic rationality. So the idea is to politicize the economy, to see the economy as consisting of social relations, historically specific social relations, and therefore as a political reality, and that means rejecting the conceptual separation between politics and economics, the political and the economic. So that's obviously also important for how we think about alternatives to capitalism, because that means that there are no transhistorical economic laws, there is no such thing as transhistorical economic rationality. It's up to us to decide how the economy should be organized, that means it's up to us to decide what should be produced and who should produce it and how it should be produced and who should get the results of that production and so on. All of these economic processes, all of these economic decisions are always necessarily political decisions. So I think that's maybe the most fundamental idea in Marx's critique of political economy. Okay, let's maybe dig a little deeper into that. So in your article you write that it's not, when it comes to the question of alternatives, you write that following from that it's not about providing an alternative economic principle, but that it's instead, and I quote, you hear about enabling democratic decision making about how our shared activities and resources should be organized. And I think you already mentioned some aspects that are kind of related to this question when it comes to how to avoid, let's say, the mistakes of economists, so to speak. But I would be interested to take a second look into this. Would you say that we should kind of ditch economics altogether? You stated that you need to historicize it, there are no transhistorical laws of economics, so to speak. But are there, let's say, some aspects maybe of the theoretical apparatus of political economy or maybe a bit more narrowly economics that can sensibly be repurposed for a constructive effort around alternatives, or would you argue that we should kind of ditch the discipline of economics altogether? That would be one part of my question and the other one would be, and this is a very crucial aspect to me, in neoliberalism, the market constitutes also a site for the production of truth. So if we argue for overcoming the market in this function as well, I'm asking myself, what could be the mechanisms, maybe in plural, to fulfill this aspect of societal organization? Because this is a very, very crucial mechanism, I would say, within the way our societies are governed today, and I get the sense that simply stating we will do it democratically then does not kind of answer the questions sufficiently, I would say, because these things operate on different levels, I would say. To be honest, I'm not sure I understand why saying we will do that democratically is not a good answer, because I think that the way the function of the market in capitalism as one of the functions of the market in a capitalist society is coordinating production, coordinating decisions of individual producing units about how much to produce and how to produce things, by what productivity standards and so on. That's one of the things that price signals does, and that would be replaced by planning. So we would take, in a communist society, we would make democratic decisions about what are we going to produce, and we would also be able, for example, to take democratic decisions about production methods and productivity standards, for example. So in that sense, I think my answer would simply be that we are going to replace the market and market mechanisms with democratic decision processes. And I'm not sure why that's not a good answer. It's an absolutely great answer in general, I would say, but since I conducted quite a couple of interviews on democratic planning by now with different people who develop different models surrounding that, I more and more got the sense that at some point, when it comes to crucial questions within these models, this is the default answer, which is kind of serving as a cover-up in many ways. And it's serving as a cover-up, for example, when it comes to questions of valuation or evaluation, like measure, what's the way in which we kind of agree to measure, let's say? What do we agree on what the basis of our decision-making and evaluation is, so to speak? So that's one element. And the other one is that in some of the instances, there's a certain, for me, problematic fallback to a certain notion of the subject, because then if you go further, you know, we do it democratically, okay, fine, that's great. And then what's the basis of this democratic process? And then you get to the question of the subject. And then in many instances, you have a kind of weird notion of the underlying subject, I would say, which is conceptualized as an autonomous, self-activating and self-governing subject, to quote Pat Devine, who otherwise has a very, very, very great model or idea of how to approach democratic planning. But there you get to some kind of, it gets more complicated than just stating, okay, we do it democratic and then it's fine, I would say, because there are certain questions that are attached to it that still need to be answered or that might complicate the whole thing quite a bit, I would say. But in general, it's of course right to say so. If we just state it very generally, then yes, absolutely, let's do democratic planning, of course. You're right that there are a lot of complicating factors here and it's obviously an extremely important question you raise about how we evaluate and how we measure and are we going to measure in hours and labor time, for example? Some people would say no, I don't really see a problem with doing that. But it's obviously extremely difficult, I think, to come up with a very clear answer to how we decide on productivity standards, for example. So if we democratically decide that we want to produce a certain amount of a certain product and then we need to know how much time does it take to produce that. And in order to make that calculation, we need a productivity standard. And how do we decide on that? Should it be the producers, for example, the people who are actually producing the product that should decide that, decide how they want to work? Or do we want to accept some kind of that they have to do it within certain limits, that the broader society as such can demand a certain productivity standard from the producers? But no matter how we answer those questions, I think it always comes back to that the only legitimate way of doing that in a communist society would be to do some sort of democratic decision making process. So that's a difficult question, but it's a question we would have to find some sort of answer to, because the alternative would be to accept the blind forces of the blind domination of the market or something like that, or a despotic authority of some sort. Right, right. No, no, neither of those, for sure. But maybe just to get an idea about the first part of the question. How much of the corpus of political economy and economics specifically can be repurposed in a sensible way for this constructive effort? Because I mean, somehow one gets the sense that it's built on rotten ground. But I mean, it is also there might still be something that can be useful. So I would be interested in your opinion on that. I'm not totally sure what to answer to this question. I'm tempted to say that there's not much of worth keeping in economics, but I think that a planned economy would require a lot of data gathering, data collecting, collecting and managing data and also a lot of calculation. And it might be that there are some aspects of economics that would be useful in order to do that calculation and handling of data, but I'm not sure. Okay, so let's kind of leave this very abstract level and get to a bit more concrete levels of the discussion. Your article describes some of the basic coordinates of how to organize our societies differently in communism in order to provide freedom, security and much, much more. Could you maybe run us through the basic coordinates of how you imagine communism to be organized? Yes, that's a big question, but I guess the basic idea is that communism requires replacing the market with planning and to create new political institutions that would enable us to make democratic decisions about what to do with our common resources and to make decisions about, economic decisions about what to produce and how to produce it and where and when and how to distribute the results of that production. And that's, I think, the basic coordinates, if that's what you mean. Well, maybe, I mean, there would be the need for some types of institutions, for example. So could you maybe go into that? Like what kind of institutions would we need? How would they need to be different from the institutions we have? So maybe you could give us a sketch of this institutional setup. Yes, I think that in order to secure the highest possible degree of freedom and security and in order to avoid concentration of power as much as possible, it would be useful to try to make decisions as close as possible to those who are affected by those decisions. I think that would be an important guiding principle for creating a network of institutions that would allow us to plan production. So power should be decentralised as much as possible. But of course, there are certain decisions that cannot be left to individuals or to small local groups or something like that, especially here, I'm especially thinking of decisions regarding use of natural resources. So we're obviously also going to need some sort of actually a global institution for making decisions about that. But so I'm imagining communist political institutions as a network of several layers of institutions that make decisions and where there's not a clear hierarchy of institutions in the way that we're used to from the nation state as we know it. So I think that if we use the word state to talk about what we know as the modern nation state, then we would have to abolish the state and design and construct new political institutions. If we use a broader notion of the state as basically any kind of political institution, then I would say that we need to come up with a new form of state, a new state power. But that's not really an answer to your question, is it? Well, that's totally fine. If you do not have this sketch of which kinds of institutions specifically would be needed and which kinds of tasks they would be able and necessary to perform, that's totally all right. I think it would be nonetheless good to kind of paint a little bit more of a picture of how you imagine this general set up to be, because there are some other aspects that you do define in your text. You write about communes. You write about that these communes should be ideally autark, more or less, even though, as you pointed towards in your last answer as well, even though there is the need for kind of higher level coordination as well. But you, at least in the text state, that you think this would be an ideal structure to have these communes to be more or less autark. You also write about a certain amount of work that people should perform. And I'm absolutely curious about getting to know whether or not this implies some form of compulsion to work, which is kind of implied, but not really made explicit. So there are other aspects to the way that you imagine this communist society to be organized that you do have ideas about. So maybe we could kind of get into those aspects as well. Yes, yeah, I use the word commune as a way of talking about what would be the basic institutional unit of communism. And ideally, every commune would have control over everything that the commune needs in order to secure a good and stable life for its communards, for the people who live in that commune. And the reason why I think that's an important principle is that it would make us less vulnerable to counterrevolutionary attempts to re-erect class society, for example, or other forms of also forms of concentration of power or corruption, something like that. If communes are not too dependent upon each other, then they would have more autonomy. And that means that if if something went wrong in one commune, it wouldn't necessarily the other communes would have a better basis for struggling against that or trying to avoid a concentration of power or corruption or counterrevolutionary movements and so on. Yet at the same time, you, I think, rightfully stress that there is actually by nature, you argue, a high level of interdependence. You know, and I when reading about this autarky aspect of the commune, even though I understand your argument as well, that it creates some kind of safety backup, so to speak, when it comes to attacks and stuff like that. But still, I was kind of a bit irritated about this falling back into this very strong notion of autonomy, because, as I said, really like the approach of emphasizing the interdependence. And this interdependence is also highly relevant when it comes to, like many, many of the aspects that will have to be addressed through each and every commune as well. You already talked about the question of resource use. I mean, if we do want to have some kind of meta level coordination when it comes to this question of resource use, which is kind of necessary if we want to, for example, address climate change and excessive resource use as it is being performed right now, then you immediately get into a situation where you will have to have functioning forms of mediation between these different levels, so to speak. So and there I would say I would argue this idea of autarky kind of goes against this grain, because the level in which this interdependence and therefore interconnection will have to be enacted is so much ingrained in each and every aspect of, for example, the production process, that it's very hard to imagine both of these same things at the same time, you know, this high, very high level of autonomy for each commune and kind of organizational coordination on a meta level when it comes to, for example, overall resource use, because these things are necessarily intertwined in a very, very intense way. So I was kind of struggling to imagine how highly autarky communes working next to each other, so to speak, but not really together as a default modus operandi, so to speak, how these autonomous communes would be able to to achieve this higher level coordination. I think that regarding the question of interdependence, I think that there's a fundamental difference between human individuals and political communities. I think humans are necessarily by nature social animals that are highly dependent upon each other. So the interdependence I speak about is the interdependence between human individuals, which is which is one of the reasons why, as I tried to explain earlier, that that's one of the reasons why human freedom must necessarily also consist in being able to participate in democratic political decision making processes. But the same point, that point about interdependence is not necessarily true of political communities, I would say of communities of human beings. Political communities are not necessarily dependent upon each other to the same degree. We are dependent on each other in the way that all political communities would live on the same planet and we would have to share that planet. And because of that, it would be necessary to have some sort of global regulation of the use of natural resources, for example, how it could, for example, take the form of quotas for CO2 quotas or something like that on a global level for each commune. And then each commune would decide how they would use that or all sorts of different quotas for the use of natural resources. And then it would be up to each commune to decide how to use that. So there is certainly an interdependence there that means that some sort of cooperation between communes would be necessary. But I think it would be a good idea to not to have a too high degree of division of labor between communes, for example, because interdependence and division of labor would always be a risk, because if one commune is dependent on something that another commune produces, then a power relationship of domination can easily arise. So in order to secure freedom and in order to counteract tendencies to inequality between communes and relationships of domination between communes, it would be important to maintain a high degree of autonomy, I would say. Because imagine, for example, that the commune you live in has decided not to produce medicine, for example, because there's a neighbor commune that produces a lot of medicine instead. And there's a division of labor where you and then you exchange or whatever you produce something else that that other commune needs. But then if there's something like a counterrevolutionary political force or movement in that other commune where all of the medicine you need in your commune is produced, then all of a sudden you would have to accept what they do or accept their demands or subject yourself to that. So you would be vulnerable in that sense if the commune you lived in don't have the resources to produce medicine for themselves, for example. How big of a commune do you imagine? So if you talk about communes as the smallest organizational unit, how big are these communes you think about? That's a really good question. And I think that communes could vary very much in size. I think one thing that's important to note here is that we would have to build communism on the basis of whatever capitalism has left us with, which means, for example, that we would have to build communism also in enormous urban areas with 20 million people, for example. So I would imagine, for example, that we would break up cities like Tokyo or Shanghai or New York into several communes. And one of the problems with an urban commune would be that it would be unable to produce its own food. So it would be a good idea, for example, to have communes that would extend from an urban area into a rural area in order to be able to produce everything the commune needs. But I imagine that communes in heavily urbanized areas would maybe have up to one or two million inhabitants or communists. But I also imagine that in other places, in very desolate areas with very few people, we could have quite large, in terms of area, large communes with maybe only 50,000 inhabitants or something like that. And there are so many different reasons why to draw the borders between communes. It could also be, for example, natural, like the landscape, the landscape could also be reasons for drawing borders between communes, mountains or rivers or things like that. So I think that we would, that the communes could very, very much incise from, for example, maybe from a few thousand people to millions of people. I think we kind of then circle back to this question of interdependence again, because I mean, for many things, I mean, if you want to build a computer, you will have to have minerals, many materials, knowledge, so many things that not every like two or five thousand people commune will be able to provide, obviously. So again, we are back to this question of interdependence and kind of impossibility of total autarky when it comes to many, many things, you know, infrastructural things like train connections that span, in this case, many communes for sure, because we would not want to kind of just get to the border of my commune and then have to change into another form of transportation, so to speak. So I mean, these are all, of course, questions that kind of pop up in this very atomized way of thinking about it. And if that would be a too big a problem, then I guess communes could decide to make one larger commune, like to fusion, is that the word, into a larger commune. Or they would maybe just accept that there are certain things that they are unable to produce. And because in such a situation people would be able to move freely between communes, then, you know, it would maybe also, we should maybe also think of that as a situation where there would be many different kinds of communes with many different forms of life and that maybe some people would prefer, you know, one way of living in a rural commune where you wouldn't have to work that much, but there would also be certain things that you wouldn't be able to have there. But you would always be able to move to another commune if you wanted to do that. Or the commune could also just, you know, it would be up to each commune to decide how much to depend on other communes or make agreements with other communes about exchanging things or whatever. Okay, maybe let's then dig a little deeper into this, because you just now mentioned exchange, so let's dig a little deeper into the planning process, because you do sketch some ideas within your text. Could you maybe run us through how you imagine a planning mechanism to go about? Yes, well, I think the first step is that we would have to make decisions about what we're going to take collective responsibility for producing. So, decisions about what to produce would have to be taken democratically in our political institutions in the commune. And then, and I imagine that that would, could, for example, take the form of different groups or organizations or that could submit proposals and that there would be some sort of, you know, public debate about that or, and then maybe several rounds of voting for those different plans, which would be plans for maybe a couple of years, let's say two years, for example. So, every second year we would vote for a new plan and that plan would basically be a proposal for what to take collective responsibility for producing. So, what to do with our common resources. And then through that political process, we would end up with a production plan and that would then have to be implemented and that could be translated to a certain amount of working hours, total working hours that would be distributed as a rule evenly among everyone. So, that's like the way I think about that in very broad terms. And would there then be a compulsion to work? We touched upon this, but didn't yet answer it. That's a good question and I think that I would love to be able to say no and that there would never be any form of, that in communism everyone would be able to do whatever they want all the time and that there would be no one forcing you to do anything, but I'm not sure. I think that's a realistic thing to say. So, it's a realistic scenario that some people might not live up to their duties all the time and I think that we would then have to discuss to what degree we would accept that because I could also imagine that it would also be possible just to calculate with that in a sense that there's a certain amount of people that wouldn't show up for work or something like that and maybe we could just accept that, but if it turns out that it has too many negative consequences in the long run, I think there would probably need to be some sort of, I'm not sure compulsion to work is the right way to describe it, but I could imagine, for example, that you could lose certain privileges if you don't take your share of collective responsibilities. I think that it's really important to, as I said earlier, to guarantee unconditional access to everything that people need to live a good, healthy, stable life, so unconditional access to housing and food, medicine, healthcare and so on, but imagine, for example, that we have collectively decided that everyone has the right to take a new education every 10 years, for example, then maybe that's a right that you could lose or imagine that there are waiting lists for certain, especially attractive housing, something like that, and then maybe if you don't show up for work, then you will lose your place on the waiting list for a housing or something like that. So there could be certain things that I'm not sure I would categorize that as or call that compulsion to work. Does that make sense? Yeah, kind of. I mean, I think for me the thing is that I would say that you end up with this dilemma, because I can sense that it's a dilemma for you as well, somehow it feels like it. And I think you end up with this dilemma because of this separation that you introduced, the separation between the realm of necessity and the realm of freedom. So maybe let's talk about that, because I think this is the source for why you then come to a point where you have this situation where you think that you need to discipline or incentivize, which is kind of a form of disciplining in a different way, so to speak. That's why you end up with this constellation where you think that you need to discipline people into doing certain types of work in order to use this remuneration or withholding of remuneration or benefits in order to steer, so to speak, the way in which things are being organized. So I think this is the root of it. So maybe let's talk about it. Could you maybe describe these different realms to us and why you believe this to be a sensible distinction? Well, it's a distinction that Marx makes, and I refer to Aaron Benenow when I mentioned it in the essay, but I'm not sure it's the best way to describe actually what I'm trying to describe there. So the idea is that there are certain needs that we agree politically to take collective responsibility for, and that's the public production. That would be what the commune decides to produce, what we decide together to produce in the commune, and to take responsibility for. So that's what we could call the realm of necessity, if we want to use that notion, because it's what we agree is necessary labor, necessary production. So it would obviously be, for example, production of food for everyone, production of medicine and housing and things like that. But there are a lot of things that would quite obviously be necessary for the commune to exist, and we would have to take care of that collectively. But then there are all sorts of products that we would not necessarily regard as a public responsibility to take care of. Maybe some people would suggest that we should build a piano factory, because we want to have pianos. But other people might have the opinion that, well, I would rather work less, because everything we would decide to produce would mean more work for everyone, because we would distribute work evenly. So everything we add to the list of what the commune produces would mean more work for everyone, because we would distribute work evenly. So it would always be a discussion about or a decision about what do we want to have more, less work, or do we want to have this or that product. And then we would disagree on that. So maybe some people would vote for a production plan that would include pianos and accept that everyone would have to work a little bit more, because we think it's nice to have pianos. And other people would maybe prefer not to work and then not to have pianos. And then whatever the result would be, the commune would not necessarily produce everything that people want. So there will be a lot of needs that will not be met, or a lot of wants that will not be met by the production that is organized by the commune. And what are we going to do about that? Well, it's obvious, I think, to say that people would be, if they can, they would be free to produce that in their free time outside of the work organized by the commune. So that's kind of like the basis for distinguishing between the realm of necessity and the realm of freedom. The realm of necessity is the all of the things we agree are necessary to produce together and that we take collective responsibility for producing. And as a political community and the realm of freedom is whatever we want to use all of us, all of the rest of our time, whatever we want to use that for. And it's important here to know that the realm of freedom would be much larger in counting in hours and we would have more free time. Yeah. I want to add that I'm not sure that those terms, the realm of necessity and the realm of freedom are the best way to describe that. And maybe that's what some of what you were thinking about when you asked me about this, that I just said earlier that organizing the economy by means of democratic decision making would be the best thing to do with one society with as high a degree of freedom as possible. So in a sense that is wrong to oppose that to freedom. Right. Absolutely. I would agree with that with the last statement. That's why I think it's an unlucky separation because for me when reading the text I always thought, what? Wait a second. What you're describing as the realm of necessity is the realm of freedom since it produces freedom as such. And also through this separation of realm of necessity and realm of freedom, you get into a position where you kind of reproduce a certain notion of labor, not only work, but labor, meaning that something that I do not want to do, but have to do. And this has all kinds of consequences in terms of motivation, in terms of effectiveness and stuff like that. So I would argue that one would need to approach what you call the realm of necessity also from a perspective through which what you have to do in order to reproduce is not just a kind of labor you have to do because you are being forced to, but is also a part of a perspective that sees this work as absolutely, I wanted to say logic, but that's maybe the wrong word, as a necessary part of reproduction that is not separated into a kind of alienating thing to do, so to speak, maybe to be a bit polemic about it, I would say. So I'm kind of against these different splits. I can definitely see why you're against that. I think maybe it's good to remind ourselves why Marx uses these words. And I think it's because when he talks about realm of necessity, I think he's talking about a kind of natural necessity here, the fact that human beings are forced to work if we want to live. And I think Marx is right in that one of the fundamental aspects of human beings is, and he says this already in his early writings in the German Ideologie, that what distinguishes human beings from other animals is that they produce, that we are forced to transform our surroundings in order to be able to live of them. So human beings, we have to work in order to live. We have to transform our surroundings in order to be able to live off those surroundings. And that is a natural necessity. And that's why he calls it the realm of necessity, right? And then the more productive we can get, the less time we need to do that, or also depending on the natural conditions of where we live. If you live in certain areas, certain places on the earth, it would require more work to to be able to survive than in other places. But the basic fact is that there is a certain amount of work that is necessary in order to live. And that's a natural necessity. And that's why Marx calls it the realm of necessity. And in opposition to that, the rest of your time you can use to do whatever you want. And that's the realm of freedom. So I think maybe the reason why, or the source of confusion or disagreement here is maybe that we're maybe confusing a natural necessity and freedom with political necessity and political freedom, if that makes sense. Yeah, kind of. But also, I think the way that you use the realm of necessity is not the way that you described it right now. So it's not the Marxian notion of subsistence. So the basic level of what you have to do in order to reproduce yourself as a physical, biological object, so to speak. So you use it in a very different way, which is encompassing much more than just subsistence. And then, and I think this kind of complicates this as well, you use these words private sector and public sector. So you use public sector for the realm of necessity and then private sector for the realm of freedom, so to speak. And I mean, this also adds another layer of confusion in that it kind of runs the danger of sounding as if you wanted to say that the private sector, in which you also state that there will possibly still be markets, exchange, et cetera, that this is the realm of freedom. And it quickly sounds like this liberal talking point where markets are equated with freedom and planning is basically tyranny and obligation, so to speak, which is definitely not what you wanted to state. And it is absolutely clear reading the text that this is not what you wanted to say. But I just think that this terminology, this additional terminology of public sector and private sector also kind of feeds into the misunderstanding, I would say. Yeah. Yeah, I think you're right about that. And there's obviously a risk that, well, because public and private sector are concepts that we also use about the capitalist economy, then there's a risk of thinking that what I'm describing there would be something that's similar to how the capitalist economy works, which is not what I'm trying to do, but not what I'm trying to say there. So I'm open to suggestions for a better way of making this distinction, because I think it is an important distinction to make. And so in a communist mode of production, we would make democratic decisions about what to produce. But what about all the things that we would decide not to produce? I mean, I could see myself voting for a production plan that would mean that a lot of things that some people would like to have would not be produced. And what do we say to those people who would then would like to have those products? I mean, the thing in capitalism is that Marx puts it somewhere in capital that money is basically a technology for transforming a social power into the power of the individual, something like that. He says something about carrying social power in your pocket or something like that. Because what you can do in capitalism is that if you have money, then you can basically decide what will happen to some of our collective resources. Because demand on the market is what determines what gets produced, right? And that power of the individual in capitalism, that money allows you as an individual to decide what gets produced. You wouldn't have that in a communist society, because that's the problem with capitalism, that it's people who have money who decide. So we would replace that with collective democratic decision making. And that would mean that there would be a lot of things that we would maybe not take collective responsibility for producing. And what do we do about that? I think it's not a good answer to say, well, people just have to accept that we're not going to produce pianos or other things that some people would maybe think would be luxury products. And I think it's better to say that people would have the possibility of producing that in their free time. And they could also find other people who would also like pianos and produce pianos together and then make some kind of private piano producing factory, if that's what they want. I mean, why shouldn't they not be able to that? Why should we ban that? And of course, that would require some resources, because you need a lot of things in order to build pianos. And where would you get those resources from? You would obviously have to get them from the commune. So again, the commune would have to make decisions about which resources to give to private production. But I think it's important to acknowledge that if we are going to have a democratically planned economy, there would be a lot of things that would not get produced, a lot of needs that would not be met by our collective production. And we would have to find a way of letting people having those needs met in other ways. So that's a way of saying that there would be production also outside of what the commune organizes. The production organized by the commune would not be all production that there is in society. So we need some sort of distinction there. We need a concept to distinguish between those two forms of production. Yeah, I mean, there are different questions attached to that. If you say that what you call the private sector will need to get some forms of resources, I think then you'll quickly get to the point where one might say, okay, why then not just include this as a need into the collective process? Why funnel these resources into a market system, so to speak, in order to be able to produce piano? So we can have mechanisms that allow for the detection of needs that are not yet met. We can develop mechanisms that are able to provide some form of plus X that might be some form of luxury goods. So there should be some mechanisms. I absolutely agree with you. There should be some mechanisms in place that are able to kind of address these extra needs, so to speak. I'm not quite sure whether this automatically implies that you will have to have a form of classical market system, you know, with some form of money, some form of value form and all the things that go along with this, because at least to me it sounded as if what you describe as a private sector would then probably have all of these things in order to be able to produce this plus X. And my argument would be there can be creative ways of integrating this absolutely valid need for the plus X into forms of democratic planning as well. So it's not about a rigid system that does not have any ability to change, to include, to have realms of freedom within what we consider the collective mechanism, I would argue. And also just as a note, it might be interesting for you to take a look at David Leibman's model of multi-level democratic iterative coordination, because he does have some kind of setup similar to that, because he imagines a core sector which is run through this mechanism, the MDIC mechanism, and then he imagines that there will be some form of kind of peripheral sector, which will have probably some market mechanisms as well, but which might bit by bit also be integrated over time into the MDIC system. So just as a note. But we do not have that much time left and I have so many questions left. So I would have to pick and choose. I mean, maybe before we get to the final question that I ask all of my guests, maybe let's get back to this very high level of abstraction that you, I think, very brilliantly look at in your book Mute Compulsion, because there you describe the fact that capitalism, in order to reproduce itself, it does not only rely on ideology and violence, but also on mute compulsion or what you call economic power. So I'm quite interested in the question, which kind of alternatives a communism would have to provide in order to address these different fields that now guarantee the reproduction of capitalism. So to frame it a bit more clearly, hopefully, what kinds of mechanisms of reproduction of reproducing itself would communism need to have in order to produce this stability and yeah, in order to reproduce itself maybe, because I think we could go one by one through violence, ideology and economic power and ask ourselves, okay, now this is in capitalism, this is handled through these three powers, so to speak, but which kinds of powers would communism need to have in order to reproduce itself? Well, I think that there would not be something similar to violence in communism, because I mean, capitalism relies on violence, especially the violence of the state. Without a state that guarantees private property, for example, through the use of violence in the form of police and military, capitalism would not be possible. So in capitalism we have a situation where the economic system is dependent upon the constant use of violence or the threat of violence for reproducing itself. That would not be necessary in a communist society, but that does not mean that I don't think that there would be any form of violence in communism. I think there would still be all sorts of aggression between people and we would have to find a way to take care of that and that would probably mean also that we would have to accept that the commune would be able to use violence towards individual people in order to force them to stop doing something like beating someone else, for example. Private relationships or violence in that way, but that is not the same as violence as an integrated element in the economic system. There wouldn't be anything similar to that in communism. Regarding the question of ideology, I think that's very different. Your question reminds me of a quote by Louis Althusser in his essay about Marxism and Humanism, which I really like. There's a passage about ideology where he speaks about what is the role of ideology and would there be any kind of ideology in a communist society, in a classless society? I think he has a very nice way of putting that, so I'm just going to read that quote because I just found it. He writes that, and I quote, in a class society ideology is the relay whereby and the element in which the relation between men and their condition of existence is settled to the profit of the ruling class. In a classless society ideology is the relay whereby and the element in which the relation between men and their conditions of existence is lived to the profit of all men. So I think that ideology is in a sense, ideology is something that will always exist. The thing is that ideology is, and he's using a broad notion of ideology here because this implies that ideology is not necessarily always a form of domination. It can also be a concept that merely describes how the way we understand ourselves and our surroundings are affected by our social world and that can also contribute to reproducing social forms that are not domination or hierarchies or something like that. So in a class society and in capitalism ideology has the function of reproducing class society, reproducing capitalism, but we could definitely imagine that in a communist society there would be ideological forms that would help reproducing a free society and avoid re-erecting class society. And then there's the question of whether there would be something similar to economic power in communism. And I think that when I talk about economic power in capitalism it's always a form of domination. And in that sense the whole point of abolishing capitalism and building communism is to get rid of domination. But economic power reveals something about a unique capacity that human beings have to organize. We can organize our material surroundings in a way that helps to reproduce certain social relations. In capitalism those social relations are relations of domination. But it's possible to think about how in a communist society we could organize our material surroundings in a way that could help reproduce communism. Or we could think about how could we organize our material conditions of existence in a way that counteracts tendencies towards domination or concentration of power, for example. That could be, for example, as we talked about, ensuring a high degree of local autonomy or autonomy in each commune by giving priority to that above, for example, productivity and division of labor. Because a high degree of division of labor would maybe mean higher productivity, less working hours for everyone, less work for everyone. But it could also have the consequence that it would make society more vulnerable to power concentration. So there would be a trade-off and we would have to make some sort of decision about that. So in that sense, if we think of economic power in a broader way as externalizing social relations in our material conditions of existence or material and social surroundings, then there would be something similar to that. We could think of using that capacity, that unique capacity of human beings to work for communist ends in communism. And then, Sören, there's a last question that I ask all of my guests and it is, if you think about the future, what makes you joyful? It makes me joyful to imagine how daily life could be under communism, to imagine, to work much less and also to imagine that we could have a totally different way of organizing the division of labor, where maybe I wouldn't just have one function or one job my entire life. Maybe I could have more than one function at the same time. So one day a week I could do one thing and then another day in the week I could do something else. And I would maybe have the opportunity to specialize in something new after a couple of years or do that throughout my life. And then, of course, it makes me joyful to imagine not to never have to be worried about money and to know that I would have a secure basis of existence, that I would have a place to live and something to eat and everything that I would need in order to have a good life without having to worry about how the economy is developing and what will happen in the next crisis and whether I will lose my job and will I be able to pay my rent and stuff like that. That makes me very joyful to think about. Wonderful. Syrin, thank you so much for being part of Future Histories. Thank you. That was our show for today. Thanks a lot for listening. If you want to support Future Histories, you can do so on Patreon. For this, visit patreon.com slash future histories. Or you can simply tell a friend that you like the show and that he, she or they might like it as well. Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks. 

**Episode Keywords:**

#SørenMau, #JanGroos, #FutureHistories, #Podcast, #Interview, #Freedom, #Communism, #Democracy, #PlannedEconomy, #Necessity, #Organisation, #Work, #EconomicPower, #MuteCompulsion, #StummerZwang, #CommunismIsFreedom, #VersoBooks, #Verso, #DemocraticPlanning
