# FH Complete S01E44 - Benjamin Bratton on Synthetic Catallaxies, Platforms of Platforms & Red Futurism (part 1/2) | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories, my name is Jan Gross and today's episode is a very special episode. Not only is it the last one of the year 2020, but it also is a new Future Histories live episode. This time, Mattia Paganelli invited me to hold a guest lecture at his seminar on computational arts at the Goldsmiths College in London, which I of course happily accepted. And since the guest lecture was three hours long, I proposed a format in which I would hold a short presentation on podcasting as a form of extended research and then afterwards record an episode of Future Histories live in front of the students. I'm absolutely thrilled that Benjamin Bratton agreed to be the interviewee for this Future Histories live episode. I will introduce him at the beginning of the interview and so I will restrain myself to saying that for me, Benjamin is one of the most interesting thinkers of our time. His book, The Stack, is rich beyond belief and his work tries to bridge a gap that absolutely needs to be worked at and that is the bridge between political theory and the techno-social realities and possibilities of our time. My warmest thanks go out to Mattia for the invitation to hold the guest lecture, to Benjamin for taking part in the interview and the discussion afterwards, and to the students of the seminar on computational arts for their participation. We talked quite a bit and so I split the interview into two parts, of which you will hear the first one today and the second one in two weeks' time. This will be in 2021, which leads me to wishing all of you a happy new year. Thank you for your interest in Future Histories, your thoughts, mails, tweets, your suggestions for guests and topics. I know 2020 has been shitty, but there are good things too and I thank you all for that. But now, enjoy today's episode of Future Histories with the great Benjamin Bratton on Synthetic Catalyxies, Platforms of Platforms and Red Futurism. So, welcome to Future Histories. My name is Jan Groß and I am very excited to welcome Benjamin Bratton as a guest in today's episode. Benjamin is Professor of Visual Arts and Director of the Center for Design and Geopolitics at the University of California, San Diego, as well as Program Director of the Terraforming Program at the Strelka Institute in Moscow. Welcome, Benjamin. Thank you very much for having me. Pleasure to be here. There are multiple episodes of Future Histories that are, in one way or another, concerned with the topic of cybernetic plant economies in the age of their technical feasibility. You have talked and written about this topic and you introduced a term that might be helpful to understand what we are dealing with, synthetic catalyxy. What are synthetic catalyxies and what openings do they possibly provide? So, yes, thank you for the invitation to speak with you. This term, synthetic catalyxy, is probably a good place to start. On this question of a planned economy versus an unplanned economy, and maybe as a way of also perhaps beginning the conversation with some consideration of what we mean by a plan, what we mean by unplanned, and maybe even what we mean by economy in this way. So the term, the catalyxy originally, the reference that I'm drawing this from is in reference to the work of Hayek, who uses this term catalyxy as part of his argument against socialist planned economies and the mid-20th century model of a socialist planned economy, which we should be clear right away. When we're thinking about what a planned economy might be for the 21st century, the models of a planned economy from the mid-20th century may not necessarily be the model reference that we should be building on. But suffice to say, for Hayek, he sees markets themselves, and it should be maybe clear not necessarily capitalism as a whole, but markets, at least in theory, as not only a space or a place by which supply and demand might meet each other, but also as a kind of calculation machine, as a kind of collaborative calculation machine that has capacities both for feats of tremendous abstraction, but also for the sort of direct fulfillment of supply and demand in the simplest sense. But the catalyxy then refers to this capacity of markets to be pricing mechanisms, that markets find prices, that how much the bananas should cost or how many desks and chairs should be produced is in essence calculated itself through the dynamics of the market. And so it's an understanding of the market as a kind of, not just something about which computation might be interested or something about which computation might be used to organize, but that the market itself has computational capacities, that it is a kind of computational apparatus. Now, as I'm sure you are quite aware because of all of the other, the discussions that you've kind of had, he's proposing this in contradistinction to the classical socialist pricing problem, which argues that no planned economy can possibly provide that calculative function that a market does as quickly or as efficiently as the market can itself. And you might imagine it sort of like if you have 10 people sitting in a room and they want to have a conversation with each other and negotiate something, like how should we rearrange the furniture in this room? And in order for the furniture in the room to be reorganized, all those 10 people would have to, let's say, write down their interest on a piece of paper and then send it to the office across the street. And then the office across the street will get all of these pieces of paper and then send pieces of paper back to every one of these 10 people one by one. And you imagine what this conversation would be like if every time anybody needed to say anything, you have to send what you wanted to say across the street to an office who then makes this plan and then sends it back to you. You would say, well, it would be just simpler if we just let, we had the conversation ourselves. So in any event, I'm not an Austrian, this isn't my approach, but just to give a sense of what the idea comes from. Now, one of the points that was made, and I'm sure you've raised this in some of your other podcasts, even back in the 60s and 70s was that, well, fine, but the capacity for computation and particular network computation, artificial computation, not the natural, let's say the natural computation of the market, but the artificial computation that when we think of computers and computer networks, you know, silicon-based computation, to send and receive information from one point to another point, they already sort of understood that this was increasingly fast and again, sort of in the height of the Cold War, 60s and 70s here, and the capacity of synthetic calculation through silicon-based computation was also becoming increasingly fast. And so this argument, and then even the metaphor that I'm using of the piece of paper walking across the street and stuff, this kind of bureaucratic model of, this particular kind of bureaucratic model of a planned economy, was probably out of date to a great extent. And that the scenario people would ask is like, okay, but what if you could, what if those messages of interest that everyone had in that rearrangement of the furniture could be said essentially instantaneously across the street, that it could be mapped against a thousand different ideal models of furniture rearrangement and then instantaneously sent back. Would not this allow for actually an acceleration in the capacity for that conversation and that negotiation to take place in such a way that this would work? And that not only could artificial computation operate to produce things like pricing signals and structure models that was equally fast to the kind of emergent processes of the market, but perhaps even faster, and perhaps could draw upon models and again, best practices and other kinds of things and goals and larger sort of macro programs that would not be available to just a small group of people doing this negotiation. And so this became, as you've all been discussing, the basis of sort of the first wave of an interest in a kind of socialist cybernetics economics that ended up, you know, was animated the work of, you know, people like to refer to Stafford Beer, but also, you know, even in others, in certain sense, even across the political spectrum, but certainly gave the rise to a kind of a different kind of idea of the mixture between computation, socialism, and the planned economy here as well. So the term synthetic catalacticy that I use, that I mentioned in the book, The Stack, going now back to your original question, is a term that would refer to that process by which the natural capacity for a market to find price signals, for example, or to organize the relations between its negotiated participants could produce this kind of what the Austrian school and its descendants like to think of as a kind of spontaneous order, could produce this process of a spontaneous order at a great distance and could do so at a scale, by using very large-scale computational systems, planetary-scale computational systems, that that spontaneous order could be produced at a scale that would be otherwise impossible to do just through the incremental aggregation of lots and lots of different supply and demand signals, could do so with a speed that would be impossible otherwise, and in principle could do so with a capacity for reflexive collective reason that would be impossible otherwise, and would be able to do so with some degree of recursive piloting or planning, and this is where the cybernetic comes in, the kind of piloting function of the whole dynamic in ways that would be impossible to happen just spontaneously. Now, as you are all probably aware, Hayek sort of pooh-poohed this whole idea, and indeed it was some of the Chicago school boys who were enthusiastic about the coup in Chile in 1973 that moved Allende and Stafford Beer's CyberSign project out of the way, who later ended up becoming quite interested in the idea of the capacity for computational systems to have these kinds of recursive market effects. And so the last point I'll make before we move on from this with this and also to maybe introduce, frame part of our discussion around the planned economy in relationship to socialism and capitalism per se, is that perhaps one of the historical ironies of all of this is that we do have planned economies today. We do have large-scale synthetic catalaxies in the scale that I'm describing, in that this is how Walmart works, this is how Amazon works, this is how Google works in terms of its pricing of words and semantics and page views and the rest of this as well, is that many of the large capitalist platforms that increasingly, in a de facto basis, have taken on many of the roles that had previously been assigned to states, themselves are in ways that would absolutely be recognized as such in the high X era of the 60s and 70s, planned economies. And they work because they are planned economies. They work because they are able to calculate prices by integrating signals with a speed and scale and complexity that would be impossible to do otherwise, which allows them to do long-term planning, long-term recursive investment, infrastructural investment and so forth and so on, all the things that the socialist cyberneticians were interested in, in ways that they too would recognize as basically, yes, that's what we meant. And this, again, is kind of the irony, that you can imagine plucking some of the socialist cybernetician economists from the mid-60s and explaining to them how Amazon works, this very, very large scale global network that doesn't actually produce anything, but matches buyers and sellers and is this massive logistical enterprise, but whose real function as a social economy is the production, is the calculation and the computational calculation of a price and then the logistical mechanism for the deliverance of this, yes, yes, yes, that's exactly what we mean. And this is also then I think part of where maybe the interest discussion is that some of the more conventional Cold War left-right distinctions of what is planned, what's not planned, what's centralized, what's decentralized don't line up real well when we actually sort of investigate these processes that we're talking about as technical systems and as institutional systems. So in any event, that's my long answer to your simple question about what is synthetic catalectics. That means we do indeed have synthetic catalectics, even though these are up until today capitalist ones. I am very much interested in the possibilities of synthetic catalectics to come. And I would like to build a bridge actually between a proposal by one of my other guests, Daniel E. Seros, and your analysis of what you have called platform of platforms. And you actually described Amazon as such a platform already. I think what Dan Seros describes in his book Information Technology and Socialist Construction indeed is a different kind of proposal for a platform of platforms. And I think it absolutely confirms an intuition you have articulated in the stack about how governance, namely planning and programming, and I quote here, may be situated at if not originate from the interface layer. There's a lot to unpack here. Let's do this step by step and start with a definition of platforms. What are platforms and what could a platform of platforms that is different from those that we already have look like? Well, it could look like it could look lots of things. The platform, as I model it in the stack and discuss it in the stack, I don't mean it in a way to sort of evangelize platforms or to argue that platforms are in themselves good or bad or whatever, but rather to try to make the argument on behalf of, you know, for a kind of future old political science or economics or indeed international relations or computer science and most likely the way in which those approaches would need to kind of converge and understand each other a bit more, particularly the computer science and political science. To understand platforms not just as a kind of technical arrangement, but as an institutional form as well and one that has logics that are different than states, that are different than markets, that their political structure is different and indeed their economic structure is different. So whereas a platform in the simplest sense can be understood as a kind of a set of generic, a kind of a set of generic schematic arrangements that allows for the organization of other forms of conditional participation within that schema to interoperate with one another in ways that wouldn't have been possible without their participation within that platform. And so the platform in this way has the capacity to, as a kind of translation mechanism, a capacity as a kind of scaffolding system by which different kinds of actions and actors and participants can organize in relationship to one another. So lots of technical definitions of platforms. One of my PhD students, Stephanie Shermans, currently writing a book on the kind of early history of platforms in the industrial era with an emphasis on Fordism. So it's also, I think, important to say just for your listeners that when we're talking about platforms, we're not just talking about things like Airbnb and Uber and these contemporary versions of platforms that, for example, Nick Terncheck writes about in Platform Capitalism, where Nick is focusing on sort of the sort of contemporary face of many of these platforms. We can also think of platforms going back to the beginning of the urban grid as a kind of platform. Some would argue even the tetrahedral body plan as a kind of platform. But the platform as an organizational and technical logic has a historical scope that precedes computation and precedes planetary scale computation. But it's one in which the planetary scale computations, we define it, never would have happened if it was not organized through, as we understand it, never would have happened if it wasn't organized through platforms. So we can talk about things like the search engine as a kind of platform in that a search engine doesn't make any of the content that's on the Internet. It simply organizes the content that other people put on the Internet in such a way that in theory it makes that content more valuable both for the producer and the receiver of that content. So you put your website or your photos or whatever on the platform, there's now thousands or if not millions of people who will see this information, which in a way somehow makes it that now those items are more valuable for you because you've placed them on the platform. They're more valuable for the receiver to place on the platform. And so this is all obviously in theory. But here's that key idea around the economic difference and where they differentiate from states and markets. If states reproduce themselves, are able to in essence pay for their provision of public services primarily through taxation, that they identify kind of choke points within value chains such as a port or where goods are coming in and out or something. And they identify these kinds of choke points within value chains and then they absorb some of the value from these choke points in the form of taxation, which then pays for the long-term provision of the public services that made the production of that value possible in the first place and so on and so forth. But it's through taxation in essence that they reproduce themselves. Whereas corporations in the normal way of understanding them as capitalist structures reproduce themselves through commodities and transactions, that you produce a commodity, you pay charge more for the commodity and there's difference in this surplus between the two in the form of profit constitutes this ability for the corporation to reproduce itself. Platforms don't work either way. They don't tax you and they don't charge you. So how do they work? They work fundamentally through the rationalization of the information that populates the platform in such a way that that information becomes more valuable for the users of the platform. It rationalizes the information that populates the platform such that that information becomes more valuable for the users of the platform. And that differential between, let's say, the value of the information before it's concluded and after it's included in the platform is the basis of how they reproduce themselves. Currently, many of those are then dependent upon a sort of a secondary dependence market upon advertising. But I would argue that that's sort of a contingent arrangement that you can have and indeed have had lots of platforms that are, that produce, that actually reproduce themselves from many other kinds of ways besides that. So first of all, just as a sort of a definitional basis of platforms from the basis of our discussion. So a platform of platforms, as you've asked me sort of here as well, would refer to some other kind of meta-infrastructural mechanism that allows for multiple platforms to interoperate with each other. And so you can think of it a bit as a kind of first order platforms that are structuring and scaffolding structural systems that allow for the rationalization of information that's included in them. And then you can imagine sort of an aggregation of multiple platforms that in essence allows the platforms themselves to interoperate with one another in such a way that they have this, in principle that you have an even more, that you have other kinds of deliberate or emergent effects situated one way or another. Now, to the question about the interface layer that you asked about where the politics sits within this. I think in many ways the politics of the platforms is situated in many different places. And all the different points of description that I've argued here are all places that are ones that are interesting because they mediate power in some kind of way, that they are relevant, platforms are relevant as social technologies because they organize power in some way. To me this isn't a reason to exclude them, but rather to in essence to be interested in them and to try to understand how they can function as means for collective reason and societal self-composition. And to be quite concerned about the ways in which they are not living up to that assignment today because we should expect that of them. And because they may not be doing so today it's possible to criticize them for this fact because indeed this is something that should be expected of them. The question of the interface layer, the interface layer as I defined it has to do really with, the interface layer is the semiotic layer within the system that allows for the translation between users that are participating in the larger system and that system itself. So in the simplest sense you're using your computer, you're seeing all the buttons with words on them on the screen. Of all of the possible things you could do with your computer, of all the possible things your computer could do now that it's connected to the internet, all of those trillions and trillions and trillions of possibilities are reduced to a composable array of several dozen menu items that you can sort of choose between. That map reduction of all of those possibilities into this composable array of menu functions is unavoidably ideological, is unavoidably political if you want to think of it in those terms, constriction or collapse of the space of possibilities into a range of options. I would also argue though in a certain sense that this is to a certain sense unavoidable as well in that it has, when I call it a map reduction, this is exactly what it is. In the same way in which you don't want a map of your city that is one-to-one with your city, you don't want a map of the city that includes absolutely everything in your city on it and would be in essence the most accurate map possible of your city. You want a map that only includes, that gets rid of 99% of everything that's there, that only shows you that 1% that might be the most relevant for the purposes of the abstractions of navigation. Interface layer functions in a similar way. It's a kind of reductive abstraction of the space of the vectors of navigation through the space. And because of this function of simplification, it also allows for the network effects of the millions of people for whom this map is legible to actually use the system, to participate in the system, to generate value for the system, to have value generated for them from the system because of its simplification and its arrangement in the same way in which a simple map makes the city navigable for more people. On the one hand, you can see this as having a kind of democratizing effect, but there's a political valence of that. There's a political valence in the map reduction problem itself and the ideological constraint. There's also a political function of this in that in the network's effects of participation, you have the kinds of aggregations of user participants in such a way that they themselves enter into social relations that they wouldn't have been able to do so otherwise. So we're still kind of setting the groundwork, I think, for maybe the meat of our discussion, but if that's helpful in terms of kind of the definitional terms for how from not just a computer science perspective, but indeed from a sociological theory or economics or political science perspective, how it is that we can understand the terms of these interrelations and what is specific about platforms, what is generic about platforms in terms of how they function in these ways, then perhaps that's helpful. Yes, absolutely. This is super helpful, I guess, and it's super important that we get to understand this in a different form. And you have already touched upon how... I'm sorry, your question was about what other kinds of platforms could happen. So the reason I answer in this way is that defining platforms in this... I first would say there's lots of kinds of platforms that only could happen. I want to point your listeners' attention also historically to look at all of the kind of histories of platforms that in fact have preceded us and to understand some of the structures there. So I'm sorry, please go ahead. No, I just wanted to say that we already touched upon how this idea of platform of platforms might be able to address what has been called the socialist calculation problem or the socialist pricing problem, you call it. But in your texts you also point that it might be able to solve the capitalist pricing problem. And maybe let's just point out what that is and how a platform of platforms might be able to address this one. Sure. Yeah, and there's lots of other pricing problems as well besides just those two. In some respects, I think we may want to... Going forward, I think we'll probably want to open up the space of possibilities beyond this sort of simple Cold War dynamic of that as well. But yeah, to your point, I argue in the book that in many ways it's the capitalist pricing... The capitalist pricing problem, as I call it, that it maybe is the more pressing issue now. So if through whatever bending arcs of historical irony it ended up being Walmart and Amazon that proved that Hayek was wrong and that the socialist cybernauticians were right and that these big capitalist companies solved the socialist pricing problem in whatever strange way, the capitalist pricing problem, as I define it, really has to do in terms of... is a way of thinking about pricing systems in relationship to negative externalities. And in a larger sense, I see this as part of the question of the more important question of ultimately what is planetary scale computation for? If the stack was a book that was about what is planetary scale computation and how does it work, the next book is really more trying to speak to this question again. What is planetary scale computation for? How do we would see it in longer historical terms and maybe even in geologic terms, in sort of anthropocene scale kinds of terms. What does it mean now that it's possible for human societies and indeed human societies to calculate their own, to model and calculate their own processes with such speed and clarity, but also in many ways how it's possible for, if you think of the entire apparatus itself, of the satellite systems, the transoceanic cables, the data centers, this entire planet, this entire kind of artificial crust that we have produced around the surface of the planet, what it means for also to create for a planet to be able to model itself and act back upon itself with such sophistication. How do we understand this even in geological terms in terms of the arc and history of the planet? And so there's some questioning then of how to locate the question of planetary scale computation within some of the philosophical questionings after planetarity itself and how this would function. Now, to the question of the capitalist pricing problem, back to this, the capitalist pricing problem, as I define it, and again, it's rather schematic, has to do with the negative externalities within economic transactions and this trying to locate the question of economics, the ontology of economics within that of ecology more broadly. Excuse me. So the question of the ontology of economics, that is, what is value? What is valuable? And how can something be identified as valuable in whatever sense is, in theory, represented within the price? That if there is, in theory, 10 euros of value within this item, that the price of this will be 10 euros, and that the capacity for calculation, the markets to calculate this or central computer to calculate this, that there is some either correspondence between the price and the underlying value or distortion of correspondence between the price and the underlying value. And so for Hayek, the socialist pricing problem represented a distortion of value in that it could never really know whether something was overpriced or underpriced because it couldn't calculate it fast enough. What many of those, it's not my idea, but many of those working in fields of ecological economics have identified is that there's a different kind of distortion that's happening within the market price in that there are underlying social and ecological costs to the production and transaction and consumption of commodities that are not reflected in the price. These are called negative externalities. They would include, so if that $100 barrel of oil, if it costs $100 because the amount that's available on the world market at any point in time would suggest that this is the price of it, what that price signal does not include, for example, are the immediate and or long-term costs of burning that oil, of releasing that, of liberating that carbon into the atmosphere, and the costs of its ramifications, whether those are immediate health costs or long-term subtraction costs. We were having a lot of discussions with colleagues around negative emissions technologies and the need for not only the decarbonization, not putting more carbon into the atmosphere, but the subtraction of existing carbon from the atmosphere in order to keep it 2 degrees Celsius. The real question of this is how do you pay for it? Well, part of the reason you can't pay for it is because the cost of the production of that carbon in the first place was not reflected in the price signal of the oil that produced that carbon in its first instance, as you see. And so this represents a distortion of the pricing. The question then for going to this question of what planetary scale computation is for is to ask the question is, would it be possible to undistort this signal? Would it be possible for there to be a price signal that was in essence not distorted in this way? It would have to be a price signal where, for example, the price of that barrel of oil would somehow be able to count, be inclusive of not just the transactional value, but ultimately all of the secondary and tertiary costs and value that would be associated with that item, such that it would be the cost of the barrel of mine being $500 a barrel or $1,500 a barrel, if that's what it would cost to actually deal with this. Now, what I sort of hypothesize in the book a bit more of as a thought experiment than as a policy recommendation is to ask them what you would need then is some ability for some kind of economics calculative substrate that was able not just to identify the immediate transactional relations, but to hypothesize a futural value of that, to imagine in the future what the cost of that would be that has not happened yet. So you burn the barrel of oil in the future that will be these costs that are associated with it in the form of negative externalities, but how much is that for one barrel of oil or for 10 barrels of oil or for one bicycle or for one lunch or for one whatever? There would be a future cost that hasn't happened yet. There would have to be a way, in essence, to price the future. How would you calculate the pricing of the future into the transaction in some kind of way? So this sort of led us to some of the questions about the ways in which planetary scale computation has already been used as a method for futural modeling and the production of models of the future that can or should have some recursive capacity to govern the present. And that's really what I think this question of the capitalist pricing, the de-distortion of the capitalist pricing that it comes down to, how can objective empirical statistically valid models of the future govern the present in some kind of way? So that includes, there's a lot of other discussions about just the general capacities of prospection, of how it is that the predictive structures of the future as part of human cognition play into this, the ways in which the kind of preemptive logics of the biopolitics of planetary scale computation play into this. But we were looking at basically two things. One was climate science. And one of the, I think the key points for this is that I make the argument that climate change itself, not the physical geophysical fact of climate change, but the concept of climate change, the statistical regularity that the earth is warming, is itself an epistemological accomplishment of planetary scale computation. That without this sensing, calculation, simulation, modeling apparatus of planetary scale computation, the very idea of climate change as a kind of reductive statistical regularity of a hockey stick arc of all of the things that are going on in the planet could not be possible. And one of the things, it wasn't possible to calculate. This is a better example of what planetary scale computation is for, if you ask me, and a different kind of model of its ultimate social, technical, and ecological potential. But it's also one that is based on this, of a kind of a temporal and historical differential between the past and the future. It's used not only to mark a present moment, but also to sample moments in the past through ice core sampling or other kinds of things to try to understand the kind of the calculus, the statistical differential arc of this over a long period of time, and also to produce valid computational simulations of what the next 10 years, or 20 years, or 30 years, or 40 years are being like. And so when we look at all the IPCC scenarios, and they're forking into the future, depending on what happens, these are computational simulations dependent upon different presumptions and first principles. But they are models of the future that we can and should be using to govern the present. That's what climate science is going to do for it. And so this is one example by which, yes, we can imagine ways in which we have models of the future that we wish to have recursively come back and model the present. The other one, a bit more prosaic that we've been experimenting with is around, of all things, insurance. Insurance is another way in which the future is priced, and that it's priced in a way that acts back upon the changes, the price signal of something we do in the present. So if you're, one of my favorite magazines of all time is a magazine called Schaden Spiegel. It's the magazine of the German Reinsurance Agency. It's basically like disaster monthly, but it also has some of the most amazingly sober descriptions of the implications of climate change on large-scale infrastructure that you'll be able to find anywhere. Because they're the ones on the hook for a lot of this, ultimately, of where this would go. And so if you wanted to build that piece of infrastructure, not only does it need to be insured, but the insurance company needs to get reinsurance against it. And if the reinsurance company realizes that that thing is going to be extremely vulnerable to climate irregularities, you can't get it insured. Or if you get it insured, the price of doing it now is going to be so much higher because that insurance policy will be so expensive that it actually changes the price signal of whether we should build that infrastructure thing in the first place. So you see where I'm going with this. That if you can actually think about what the long-term climatic ramifications of some kind of action or investment would be in the future, such that those negative externalities are not only not excluded from the price, but are formed the basis of the model by which the price is produced in the first place. Then you go some distance towards at least de-distorting that initial price signal in such a way that you have a transformation to some extent what we even mean by price in the first place. You introduce a different temporality to economic ontology, and that what constitutes value is being produced in relationship to not only future value in the same way as stock price is related to future value, but also related to future costs in ways in which that are inclusive in this. This is a bit what we mean by that idea. Obviously, some of the open questions here is how total of a system is necessary for this to work. Is there a way in which does this have to be entirely some sort of massively centralized mechanism, but through which other forms of valuation can't escape, or is there some kind of way in which even the organized participation within a kind of economics of this sort that is futureal in this way, that is inclusive of what are present externalities in some sort of way, is there some kind of way that participation on this can be incentivized in a way in which it itself becomes a kind of catalytic institution, a kind of bottom-up institution rather than necessarily one that requires some kind of Skynet system to enforce itself. I think that's kind of an open question, which means that in a certain way we're back to where we started. Is that if all of this started in a debate between is it possible to have, can we only have bottom-up organization of this and will it work itself out, or do we need some kind of centralized top-down piloting function to make all of this work properly? If that's where this argument started in the 1950s, even when we're talking about how you incentivize participation within this situation I described, that question doesn't present itself as already solved. This is super interesting and I think there's a different layer to it, which is quite important as well, because actually I think what you're kind of saying is that the future is already priced, but it could be priced much better. And this kind of stays within the realm of pricing the future and argues for better models and the incorporation of externalities specifically into the question of pricing. For example, yes. But there is a different level, and maybe this is the homo sapiens level at the end, there's a different level to this. And Evgeny Morozov writes about it in his essay in the New Left Review on Digital Socialism, and I'd like to quote him here, When Austrian economists respond to today's defenders of central planning by noting that any non-capitalist system, even one rooted in the power of big data, could only beat the efficiency of the price system if it also created new behavioral modes and frameworks of meaning, they have a point. I think this is super important and I think it's relevant for what you just said as well, and at least in two key aspects, it's relevant for the question of synthetic catalectsies to come, specifically if they are embedded in some form of red futurism. The first one would be, and this is implicit in Morozov's quote, that prices are not just numerical, but social, and that it is therefore not enough to find a different method of quantification or weighing. So this would kind of mean that it's not enough to price the future even better, because there's still the question of new behavioral modes and frameworks of meaning, which are kind of an obstacle and a chance, I guess. And the second one is that markets are not equal to capital and that capital does not necessarily need markets, and that therefore the force of capital as such would need to be abolished if one wanted to be serious about synthetic catalectsies as red futurism. And this is a specific form, you know? So I think those are probably two questions, and maybe if I just, so I can keep them in my mind at once, maybe we ask them, I'll try to answer them one at a time, and maybe you can ask me the second one again after this as well. So I would say that I don't disagree, I probably don't disagree essentially with the point that that simply another, just a different means of calculating price about the same thing would be sufficient. What I'm calling a kind of a shift in economic ontology goes to that question of what value is and what is even being priced in the first place. So it's not just when we're talking about a barrel of oil, it's not just this particular assemblage of molecules that is transacting owners, but it's understood to be a whole other set of past, present, and future dynamics that one has illegal liability in its relationship to that becomes part of the price. And I think another way in which this goes back to this question of insurance and another future thing, part of the question about price has to do with, and another kind of externality is a political externality in that it is the institutions that allow in essence for the renunciation of liability in relationship to something. And you can just think, I mean, in the simplest possible sense, think of this in terms of like trash. So like you've got something in your house and you put it out in the garbage can and like someone comes along and takes it and says, well, this isn't yours anymore because you put it in the trash, right? And somehow in the act of like getting rid of it, you're not only renouncing property claims over it, you're also renouncing liability claims over it as well, right? And so part of the process of the reason why negative externalities can even work in this way is because we have this magic function by which the renunciation of private property constitutes the renunciation of liability. So I can spew all of the carbon dioxide into the atmosphere once I want. And once it's sort of above the airspace property line of my factory, it's no longer my carbon dioxide, and therefore I'm no longer liable for this carbon dioxide. So you see the point about this renunciation of liability in this space as well. Now, what I'm talking about as the shift of a kind of economic ontology has to do some ways in which that magic function of renunciation of liability and renunciation of sort of embeddedness within these socio-molecular relations is not something that can be so easily renounced, that is in fact part of what you're buying when you enter into the relations with that barrel of oil in the first place. So that is part of what I mean. So that is a bit where it seems like I probably agree with Evgeny in the sense to which it's not just a matter of finding another mechanism by which we measure the same thing. It's a matter of changing what we're measuring in the first place. But where I would say, where it may be disagree, when he says something like, I think your line was a measure, it's not just a matter of measuring and calculating something but rather something else because these have social relations. I think my point is that measuring and calculating are social relations. What he's saying is it can't just be these measuring things because it's social. I'm saying that is in fact what the social is. Measuring things and calculating things and weighing things not only have social functions, they are social functions. They are sort of the key social functions as part of this whole kind of dynamic as well. And so it is for sure something that needs to go deeper into this question of how we identify not only how we value the thing but what the thing is in the first place. So agreed. Now whether or not this constitutes a kind of behavioral change, it would. It's a matter of, it's an open question though I think whether or not the behavioral and psychological transformation would be the cause or the effect. And honestly there's sort of different approaches and schools of thought to this. And this probably goes to a more deeper sort of approaches to ecological politics and indeed just the kind of dynamics in general. For those whose alliance, whose those sort of like way of seeing the world is one in which large scale change happens through the accumulation of virtuous acts. That if enough people do enough virtuous acts and those virtuous acts assemble into millions and billions and trillions of virtuous acts, then there will be an infrastructural transformation will ensue through this deliberate conscious psychological moral shift in paradigmatic worldview and then the accumulation of virtuous acts. And then there's others. And I would be on the second side of this a bit more that would suggest in many ways the history of technology and the history of society are not only intertwined with one another, but in many respects, shifts in social systems and in cultural systems and indeed in political and economic systems usually happen more as an effect of transformations within underlying technological systems. This is in a certain sense based a superstructure kind of approach that in transformations not just in the means of production, but indeed in the mode of production that you then see shifts in culture and shifts in psychology as a result of these. And so I think in many respects, my inclination would be to look at ways in which you'll get greater leverage faster by looking at ways in which there would be shifts in geotechnology and shifts in geoeconomics that would bring about shifts in geoculture rather than trying to bring about a spiritual transformation that would subsequently down the line transform those geotechnologies. It's really not because of an aesthetic preference of this so much, but rather than just, I think that the history of economics and the history of technology suggest that that's the more likely path. But at least as far as I understand it, the question that he's aiming at when he's saying new behavioral modes and frameworks of meaning, it's more about what are the crucial points that are not only concerned with these technical aspects of, for example, how to price the future any better because these ideas of externalities and how you can behave with your property, this is ingrained in the very concept of property as such. So if you are not able to change this idea of property as a form of behavioral mode and a framework of meaning, then you won't get to a point where you will be effective in bringing people to a point of not treating it as an externality. Do you see what I mean? I think there's a way of approaching it from the perspective of, okay, we need to find a more effective pricing mechanism for these externalities, or we need to find a way to address this social institution of property as such because the property as such, as a social institution and a framework of meaning, is one of the root causes for the ways we do address these questions on a large scale. And this is not coming from a moral perspective, but as well from a perspective of effectiveness, I guess. Possibly. I agree with you everything up to the point of the phrase root cause. I see it as root effect. I completely agree with you that ultimately you can't have one without the other. I don't argue with this at all. If there is a changing in somehow, even at the level of some shift in the geotechnology of pricing and organization and the ontology of property that has some kind of planetary scale legal binding structure, if this isn't, in fact, become part of the culture of our relationship to object and molecular assemblages around us and our socioeconomic environment, if it doesn't actually become a social infrastructure and doesn't actually become the basis of the way in which we plan, conceptualize, model, and recursively organize our relationship to the material world, then it's nothing. It's not even a technology because it's not being used. There's no argument. I absolutely agree. And then part of the question is, how is it that at societal levels that the kind of models that we have, cognitive models, at an individual level and at a group level, cognitive models that understand and calculate advantage, calculate the future, calculate our interests, calculate our interactions with these kinds of things are done so in relationship to these differential systems. If that isn't part of how we are rethinking the world, then these technologies are, in fact, not even technologies. I would agree with that because they're not being used in this way. What I'm simply suggesting is that there is a presumption, and I think, honestly, I think it's one that's rather deep in a Western liberal individualist framework, that first there is a cognitive psychological transformation that then is made manifest upon the world, that somehow the agency and subjectivity are the same thing, that our agency in the world is ultimately a function of our subjectivity. And what I'm suggesting, honestly, I think I'm making more of a Marxian argument that in many ways that the transformations in the mode of production, and I would include these shifts in economic ontology as a shift in the mode of production, ultimately transforms the culture in its image more so. You can't have one without the other, but in terms of where it is that we should, where I would place my bet, now speaking of the future, so placing my bet on which is more a cause of the other, I'm going to vote that base causes superstructure more than superstructure causes base. Nice, super nice. I love this answer, and it already touches upon one of the next questions which is concerned with the individual. This has been the first part of the Future Histories Live event with Benjamin Bretton. I hope you enjoyed it, I certainly did. If you want to support Future Histories, then you can do so via Patreon or through a simple donation. And if you're not able to support Future Histories economically, then this is absolutely fine, because there is a fantastic money-free way to support the project too, and that is by telling a friend about the show who might be interested in the topics we discuss here. Thank you all, and hear you in two weeks. 

Episode Keywords:

#FutureHistories #Podcast #DataPolitics #BenjaminBratton #JanGroos #Interview #Society #SyntheticCatallaxy #Catallaxy #PlannedEconomy #Planwirtschaft #DesignAndGeopolitics #Terraforming #Strelka #CyberneticRevolutionaries #PlatformCapitalism #NickSrnicek #EdenMedina #Democracy #SurveillanceCapitalism #Überwachungskapitalismus #ShoshanaZuboff #ProjectCybersyn #StaffordBeer #BigData #EvgenyMorozov #DigitalSocialism #SocialistCyberneticPlanning #Cybernetics #Cybersyn #Kybernetik #SocialistCalculation #sozialePlanwirtschaft #kybernetischeGovernance #OpsRoom #digitalePlanwirtschaft #Hayek #User #TheStack #Platform #PlatformOfPlatforms #RedPlenty #FutureHistoriesInternational
