# FH Complete S02E10 - Aaron Benanav on Associational Socialism and Democratic Planning | Future Histories

Welcome to Future Histories. My name is Jan Groos and it is my great pleasure to welcome Aaron Beneneff in today's episode. Aaron is a postdoctoral researcher at Humboldt University in Berlin and author of the excellent book Automation and the Future of Work. Furthermore, Aaron recently published an article that can be understood as a contribution to the ongoing debate about plant economies. The article is called How to Make a Pencil and was published in Logic magazine. If you are a regular listener of Future Histories, then you will know that the question of plant economies features quite prominently within this podcast. So there are a couple of episodes that you will find in the show notes relating to the topic. Before we start, I would like to thank Lukas, Wilfried, Martin and Anna for their kind donations and I would like to welcome Troy as a Patreon of Future Histories. Thank you so much. This is really a great help. But now please enjoy today's episode with Aaron Beneneff. Welcome Aaron. Hi Jan, thanks for having me. Aaron, there are many great interviews you gave on Automation and the Future of Work and I encourage everybody to both read the book and listen to these interviews. I will put the links to some of them in the show notes. However, today we will do things a little differently and start with the last chapters of your book and then move further from there to discuss some of the more recent work you did, namely your article in Logic magazine and a short response you wrote for a journal and kindly sent me before this interview here. So let's start with the last chapters of Automation and the Future of Work, which are of great interest to me because there you draw a sketch of what a truly desirable future or better truly desirable futures might look like. And crucially, you ask how we could achieve these futures without resorting to some sort of Deus ex machina fantasy like full automation. Could you describe to us the utopian glimpse you provide in chapter six of your book, the chapter on necessity and freedom? Yeah, I'm really excited to talk to you about that chapter because it's really been the inspiration for me going forward. This is really the topic I'm going to be writing about in my next book. But it wasn't those chapters, the chapter at the end, it wasn't something I intended to write when I started this project about automation and the return or renewal of automation discourses in our present moment. When I set out to write the book about automation, I was really writing in the mode of a kind of critical theorist. I was just writing about what this new automation discourse was and my account of the kind of empirical limits of that theory as an explanation of why people are so insecure today in their jobs, why there's so much inequality and why the nightmare scenarios that we're facing, why the current situation we face is really difficult to explain in terms of automation. So I was writing as a critical theorist, and then I kind of while I was writing, I decided to add this kind of positive conclusion at the end, a positive vision of the future. But what I would stress in this conversation is how much that positive vision of the future I provide at the end of the book was shaped by the kind of critical reflections on automation that I was making in the other chapters. And I think the really key idea here is how much I was inspired by the vision that at least some of the automation theorists have when they're talking about a world of advanced robotics and machine learning and eventually artificial intelligence. Some of them were pointing towards this positive possibility of what they called a post-scarcity world. And, you know, what I was interested in are really the kinds of social and political themes that they emphasize that could be achieved with this technological Deus Ex Machina. It's important to think about those for a moment before turning to my alternative. What really impressed me about the automation theorist vision of the future is that it had this idea that once, you know, all work and production and planning could be taken care of by machines and computers, human beings would experience this kind of deep and abiding security in their lives. They would no longer worry at all about meeting their material needs, and they wouldn't even have to work. They could no longer think of the meaning of their lives in terms of work alone, and they would have to kind of become something greater, right? There's this idea in the automation vision that it's not. I mean, there's a there's a trouble there. Like, what would it mean if computers took what it what would it mean to live in a world where computers could write a better symphony than any human being, right? There's questions there about what is the meaning or purpose of human life. But on the whole, there's this kind of positive vision in which human beings are freed from necessity and then able to pursue their passions, whether those are games or explorations or inventions or whatever it is that particularly motivated them. And the way that I approach this in the book is that I talked about how for, you know, the past five hundred years, there have been social thinkers and dreamers who had a very similar idea about achieving a world in which human beings were no longer plagued by the experience of scarcity and the fear for their lives. And instead, through organizing production and distribution differently, they could be freed from these cares about necessity and, you know, begin to live this different kind of life on the other side of that, a life of true freedom. And what I found so interesting about those theories, and for me, it goes all the way back to Thomas More, but also, of course, very importantly, it's about 19th century socialist thinkers like Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels and also Peter Kropotkin and a whole cast of other characters into the 20th century, too, is that they didn't think we had to wait for some technology to make these transformations. They thought that we could already begin to do that right now. They weren't trying to go backwards like Rousseau or some other thinkers, kind of a pastoral or romantic past. Instead, they thought with the technologies we have, we can already begin to transform the world and get to post-scarcity. But here, it's really about doing so not through getting rid of all work, but rather through reorganizing, redistributing and reducing the work that has to be done. So it's not a vision in which we're freed of all social obligation. Because I think that an important fantasy in the automation story is the story in which there's this dream of being freed from social obligation by machines and computers across every realm of life. And in this other vision, the more social vision that I'm drawing on, it's not that we are freed from all obligations, it's that those obligations are transformed in a way that frees us. And that's what I found so beautiful. That was the inspiration for what I wrote there. Maybe we could talk more about the specifics, but that's at least some context for how I've approached this project. Yeah, absolutely. We will talk about the specifics. But before we get to your idea of how we can approach it, let's talk about two approaches that you dissect within your book before you get to describing your own ideas. Ideas and these two approaches are Neo-Kinesianism and UBI. And you argue that neither can in the long run live up to the expectations if the expectations are as they should be maximalist in the way that you just described it. You argue that both approaches do not sufficiently address the power of what you call a capital strike. I think it's important to address this because the way in which these left market based visions fail to bring about the futures they envision renders visible why it is so important to develop new frameworks and visions of desirable futures. What is a capital strike and why do both Neo-Kinesian frameworks and UBI based proposals fail to address this core problem? That takes us in a very different direction from the kind of positive vision of the future. It's sort of about what's chaining us to the present, right? What keeps us locked into this world and its attendant insecurities, inequalities, and power imbalances. And I think there, you know, one thing I would say kind of to keep us within the context of this conversation about the future is just to think back to the 80s and 90s. Really the moment when the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc first seemed to be opening towards possible reforms and then collapsed, right? And the moment of China's market reforms and so on. At that time, you know, when people were considering what could a socialist future look like, they really felt the need to admit that markets seem to just be producing better outcomes than any efforts at planning. And, you know, this was the 80s and 90s. This was a time when in the West, it seemed like markets had enabled this very dynamic shift to computers and digitalization. And that the Western economies had sort of come through deindustrialization and were sort of roaring forward, especially the United States with like new investments and kind of picked up rates of growth. And so when people were thinking about what planning could be or what an alternative was to capitalism, they thought, well, capitalism is this dynamic system that generates high persistent rates of growth that allocates and reallocates, you know, fixed resources and labor in this very efficient way. The world looks very different from where we stand now, 30 years after the fall, 32 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Capitalism turned out to be a system that actually led to a process that economists have called secular stagnation. Capitalist economies have grown at slower and slower paces. And as they've done so, they've generated kind of, you know, an immense problem of financialization and its attendant kind of asset price inflation and frequent financial bubbles and therefore also misallocations of resources. They've generated massive inequality and they've generated not more resources to fund a welfare state, but actually persistent austerity and giving and governments giving up a lot of protections on the environment and on workers. It's been a system that's been just totally unable as of yet to find a way out of the climate crisis. And to me, all of these things point to a really important feature of capitalism and especially of late capitalism, but it's a persistent feature of capitalism in general that was sort of understudied in a way in these debates about planning, at least in the recent period. And that is this idea of the capital strike. It's the idea that it's the idea of the weapons that capital has in order to maintain its control over the production process. Basically, because, and this is really crucial also to my vision of socialism, capitalists in aggregate have the capacity to decide through their investment decisions, whether the economy grows or shrinks. Those decisions are what cause economic growth or economic recession. And when capitalists feel that there is a kind of poor business environment, that the outlook for investment is poor, they threaten to disinvest from the economy. They threaten to not invest and they do invest less, they hold their money in financial forms, and that causes stagnation. It also causes governments to try to do everything they can to satisfy capitalists, to try to recreate a positive business environment. Especially since the 80s, everything we've been hearing and all of these kind of nationalist and revanchist politics are all about the idea of restoring the rate of growth, restoring a golden age that existed before. And that's fundamentally about the way that politics is subservient to capital and to capitalist weapon, the capital strike. It's very interesting in the present moment that under conditions of stagnation for a decade, followed by the pandemic, we're starting to see more of an interest in public investment. And I think that that points to a different path, something that's way more interesting and politically relevant than what we've seen for the past 10 or even longer period of time. Because what we've seen so far, to return to your question, is precisely either proposals for basic income and various kinds of neo-Keynesian proposals. And maybe I'll start with the basic income one, because I think that it's in a way easier to deal with. In a lot of ways, there's a larger story here. Basic income comes out of a kind of neo-classical economic framework and perspective in which the idea is that no one can judge what you need. No one should have any say about what you need. You as an individual should just get this income to improve your life. And there's something very positive to me about that, like basic income shares with me and with a whole range of people, this idea that benefits should be universal. We live in a wealthy society. No one should ever experience poverty. And that the idea that getting people out of poverty, giving them this abiding sense of security is an incredibly important goal for humanity, not just in any individual country, but for the world. The problem is that because the basic income program is really a distributional program, it doesn't touch the engine of growth of society. And in that sense, even though there's a lot of specific differences about basic income, from an overall perspective, it's just another welfare program. And from the right wing, basic income is an idea about replacing the existing welfare state with cash payouts. From the left, it's a more expensive program because it would be built on top of the existing welfare state. But whatever it is, it's just a transformation in the form of the welfare state. And my argument is that we've been experiencing decades of stagnation and the threat of this capital strike, the threat of capital disinvestment has been used to push for austerity over and over again. And it remains to be seen whether we reenter a period of austerity now, when and if the pandemic ever kind of calms down. But my view is that basic income, because it's a purely distributional program, it doesn't touch the engine of growth. It doesn't touch the organization of production. It won't really change anything dramatic. It will suffer from the same kinds of austerity that other programs in the welfare state have suffered from. And as a result, it will tend to remain at a very low level and it won't really provide people with the lasting security that they need. There's a lot of other problems with basic income, but that's sort of one of the crucial ones. And it fits on the other side with the problem with neo-Keynesianism, which is neo-Keynesianism, I think, of specifically as a program that says, very similarly to basic income, we shouldn't tell people what they want. We shouldn't try to affect in any big way, you know, collectively what society is able to provide. We should leave these choices up to individuals and firms. The neo-Keynesian perspective is to say we should just stimulate demand and use that to kind of ease structural transformations in the economy. And people think of the Keynesian era as having been this earlier era of the 50s to the 70s. What I show in my book is that actually in a much more direct sense, we should think of the period since the 70s as the Keynesian era, because that's when states started spending huge amounts of money and going massively into debt in order to try to stimulate investment. They kept doing it. Even when they were doing neoliberal austerity programs, many states were continuing to just spend far more than they were earning in tax revenue to try to restart the engine of growth. And what's amazing about all of this spending and all of this accumulated debt is how little. And, you know, to that, we should add low interest rates and, you know, asset price inflation and so-called private Keynesianism, which was also a major feature of this era. None of that actually worked to restore growth. In fact, you know, the situation kept getting worse and worse. And again, that made it very difficult to imagine that the basic income programs would work. So it's part of this deeper story about the limits of capitalism in our era. We probably don't have time here. You know, it's a whole other project to explain why that's happening. Right. But that it's happening and having these effects, I think, is crucial. And also that, you know, under these conditions, states are now beginning to consider the idea of a much more muscular public investment program, which I think is actually something different, but faces the potential for a much stronger response on the part of capital. Because a real public investment program would threaten capital's control over the investment function. And that's why I think already, you know, we've seen a massive amount of pushback against any kind of increase in public investment today. But that's, yeah, that's another story. And an interesting story indeed, because I recorded an episode with Ulrike Herrmann on Kapitalistische Planwirtschaft. And she kind of aims in this direction, I think. And to me, I'm very sceptic about it. Maybe it's worth pursuing as a type of transformational period or something like that. But I'm highly doubtful if this really, really is able to break the power of capital in any way, shape or form. I have to be honest, because to me, it seems as if it's like some sort of greenwashing, but it's a route that capital might take in order to not post the question that should be posed, which is the property question, so to speak, or as you call it, the conquest of production. And this is actually what we should definitely aim for. And yeah, this leads us to what you identify as the basic precondition for truly desirable futures, namely the conquest and fundamental reorganization of production itself. You state that the, and I like to quote you here, that the precondition is not the free distribution of money, as you just described it, as the most recent wave of automation theorists have it, but rather the abolition of private property and monetary exchange in favor of plant cooperation. So let's dive deep into the question of how this plant cooperation could be organized, the question of how we could produce pencils differently. How would we go about organizing the socially necessary reproduction, what you call the realm of necessity, as well as the realm of freedom? How would we approach this plant cooperation in concrete terms? I think that there's a real link between what you were just talking about, about the capitalist planned economy and the question that you just asked, because I guess in my view, when we think about Keynes and the more radical side of Keynes' thought, which I think is a very interesting and worthwhile topic to investigate, I think you're right that the goal he had was basically to keep the structures of society more or less the same, but to find a way to transform how investment was carried out in a way that would promote kind of permanent full employment and meeting people's needs to a greater extent. But his vision was one in which you could kind of keep all of the social, structural, and power differential features of society more or less in place. And that meant having a technocratic economy with very few people really involved in making decisions and most people being sort of pawns in that process with very little say in what they do. And I guess part of the claim I want to make is that what is essential here is to really meet people's needs and to recognize that really meeting their needs is already to dramatically transform power relations in society. It's so fundamental to the way our society works that the vast majority of people are deeply insecure in their lives, and that's what makes it possible to exploit them. That is to say in a kind of capitalist language to employ them profitably. And that very same situation is the one that means that when part of our resources are set aside on the social level for investment, which means for the repair of our infrastructures and the building of new means of production, all that stuff, very few people have any kind of say in how those resources are used. So there's a fundamental relationship in our society between not meeting people's needs, leaving them very insecure, and also denying them very much of a say at all and really any say in how our resources are actually used. And so what's really crucial is that these things kind of have to change at the same time. That is to say we need to move towards a world where we really meet people's needs completely independently of their contribution to production. That's to me a very important part of the story, something we should talk about, perhaps a controversial claim, and the idea that in doing that we couldn't keep society and its property structures and its decision making structures the same. We would have to, and we would want to, of course, transform them so that people collectively have much more of a say in how resources are used to meet people's needs. So those two sides, when I say to the conquest of production, yeah, in a way, we could break it up into these different pieces. One is transforming the production system we have so that it actually meets people's needs and guarantees them this good quality of life that frees them from scarcity and opens up their worlds in a different way. In order to do that, we would have to actually change what work looks like in a way that makes the work that people do more satisfying. We obviously live in a world where most people only go to work because they have to. There's a small minority of people who enjoy their work, but it's a small professional class for the most part. So we'd have to really transform the character and the structure of work relations. And then the third thing that's absolutely essential to both meeting people's needs and reorganizing work is transforming how investment takes place and disconnecting investment. We mostly think of investment as a financial process. We think of investment in the form of they invest in these firms and then the owners receive some income as a result of that. But even in our society, there are many forms of investment, like public investment, like building schools, for example, where the assets produced are not capitalized. They don't generate a return for the people who build the schools. And I think it's really essential that we talk about socialist investment. That is to say like how the process of investment takes place once it's freed from it, disconnected from the financial and profit making system. So the conquest of production has at least these components, transforming, guaranteeing people's needs, transforming work and transforming investment. And, you know, maybe the overall idea there that would follow through all of those is democratizing these institutions. And I'm sure we'll get a chance to talk about that as well. Absolutely, we will. But let's maybe since you highlighted and since it seems to be very important for the proposal that you try to sketch, let's maybe start with the question of investments. So how would this be organized? How would we all be able to bring in our ideas into what investment is a good investment? How would the many, many, many, many, many different positions that there will be be organized in a way that is still somehow like efficient? Not in the sense that the economists use it mostly today, but in the sense that it will bring about results that are to all of our benefit. So is there a type of like institutional setup or a certain logic at place that you could describe to us? Yeah. And, you know, in my view, this is the key question. I think that when people have talked about planning, they focused far too much on what I and others would call static planning. That is to say, like, you know, we're producing this many, you know, feet of or what do you use here, meters, sorry, European mode. We're producing this many meters of, you know, steel tubing. And how are we going to distribute or allocate the steel tubing across firms? That's a static allocation question. What I'm interested in and what I think is the primary question is the dynamic question. That's to say, should we increase our capacity to produce the steel tubing? Should we pour more resources and labor into, you know, our ability to produce steel tubing or something else like schools and hospitals? And I don't know, phones or whatever else it is that people might want. To my mind, you know, the way society is organized today is really a snapshot. It's a it's the consequence of these big decisions about investment that were made in the past and the shape of our future is also about the investment decisions that we make today. And, you know, I'll say there's a few different things to say about that. One is that, you know, I think that the key to thinking about what socialism is, is that it's a break with the profit based accumulation system. And I think this goes all the way back to Marxist critique of the go-to program. But, you know, we can think about it in a variety of different ways. The key idea here is that in a capitalist society, the way that society changes over time is that these gaps open up between, you know, I mean, just put it in a Marxist term like price and value. And that makes, you know, that creates differential profit rates. And that's what capitalists are looking for. They're looking for opportunities to make profit. And that's where they push their resources. And that's how society, you know, resources are then reallocated and societies dynamically transforming over time. In a capitalist economy, that means that the kind of sole or core condition for investment is profit making. It's really like costs versus, you know, sales. It's like how much more can we make than what we have to spend? And it's basically like in that crude way, a kind of monetary cost benefit analysis. That leaves so much on the table. There are so many facets of life and so many things that people care about that just don't get included in that metric. And or can only be included in a very partial way within it. Now, you know, the big one here that people talk about is, of course, like environmental externalities. And we could talk about that in more detail. But I'm interested in a whole range of other ways or other aspects of society that aren't included here. So, for example, like, you know, improving worker satisfaction can only appear to capitalists to be a cost of production. It's not an independent goal of production. Improving kind of like, you know, the like there are all of these underserved areas in society that have not, you know, where there haven't been jobs for a long time, where the infrastructure is very poor. Or operating in those places isn't a benefit, you know, to society and a capitalist world. It's just another cost and so on. And you could go down the list. So I think that the key to a socialist investment project is that we would take these multiple criteria as ends in themselves. So efficiency would, of course, remain a major concern for socialists, but so would work satisfaction, ecological sustainability, the justice and reparations for past injustices with regard to like the location of schools, hospitals, you know, work and so on. And taking all of these multiple criteria into account means that there's no longer any like, you know, in a lot of ways, it's important to say that when economists talk about an equilibrium, that is largely a scam. You know, it's largely a false sort of it's a theoretical goal that they have because it makes it seem as if there's only one answer. There's only one way society can be organized. That's the best. Once you have multiple goals that are independent, you see that really there's many different options for where society could go. There's many possible options. There's not simply one technical or economic optimum for investment questions for where society should go. And that means that these questions become inherently political and ethical questions. Even the question of like the technical organization of production, there might be one best technical way to do things if you're looking to maximize output. That was really the goal in Eastern Bloc countries. There might be one technical best way to do things if what you're interested in is the most efficient method, given the resources we have today. But if you add into that, you know, making sure that the workers who do the work feel good about the work they're doing. If you add ecological questions as well, then the question of what the best technical solution is, there's no longer a single best technical optimum. We have to debate and decide as a group, like what kinds of tradeoffs we want to make in that process. So that's, I don't know, I think to me, this is the core idea is that, you know, in a capitalist society, everything has to fit in this single criteria that's given ultimately by the money economy and by profit making. Whereas in a socialist society, we're freed from those restraints. We don't have to include all the other good things in life as costs. We can actually see them as benefits, ends in themselves that we are independently pursuing. But precisely for that reason, we have to see these questions as having no single solution. There's really options that society is presented with that we have to walk down. I think what you're describing on the one hand, this is obviously absolutely great because it kind of explodes the possibilities of futures as well, because it opens up this this realm of how to do things differently. But precisely because of that, the question of how to do it exactly, how to go about organizing this, how to find procedures that will work to organize this multitude of input that is coming in and that should be recognized within the process. It raises the question how we can how we can organize it in very practical terms. I mean, this is where the capitalist mode, of course, kind of works more or less by, as you just described it, having all these externalities ignored. It kind of works to dumb down the whole thing towards one end, which is making profit. But if we do not want to pursue it this way, which we don't, then it, of course, also makes it quite difficult to include all the other aspects, I guess. Yeah, I think that that's right. Right. And I think it's important to say that, you know, the way our economy is organized now is in many ways, you might say, I mean, I want to say needlessly complex, but that's perhaps wrong. It's just highly complex in the wrong direction, because it's true that in our society, I mean, on the one hand, you have a kind of investment good sector. So you have all of these resources, like physical and labor resources, machine tools industries, steel industries, you know, all these computer programmers and engineers who are sort of set aside for the purpose of repairing, restoring and transforming our means of production, our productive system. But the fight to, you know, employ them takes place through this incredibly complex financial system that involves, you know, pretty, in our society, pretty large share of society's resources just go into this highly complex financial system for deciding who should get access to these investment resources and maybe most importantly, who has the claim on the income streams that are generated from the use of these resources. So we live in this very complex financial system. And in my account of socialism, I think it seems obvious that socialism would have to find an alternative. Hayek calls it, he talks about the market as a discovery process and really claims that only a non-dialogical system, only a kind of, you know, a system where the information is being transmitted through the market can actually undertake this work. And I'm saying it is an alternative that we need something more like a democratic discovery process. We need something that involves a lot more people, not just a tiny sector of financial investors and corporate boards, but many more people to kind of figure out where these investment resources should go to best improve the happiness of society. And I think that, you know, in my view, it's not just something that we should do. It's something that we really have to do. Like people are, especially if people have their needs met and they care about all these different aspects of society, they're going to want there to be ways in which their voices are heard when they feel like all these different dimensions of their life aren't being accounted for. And that's what we've seen, I mean, in countries where workers are much more powerful because they're more organized and because there's full employment. So in times where that happened, workers have really demanded changes in the work process. They've demanded all of these changes. And I think that's the kind of world that I think we'd be moving towards. So anyway, how would it be set up? That's the key question you're asking. And I think that the thing to see is that on the one hand, you would want to think about how would be organized at the level of the local workplace. That is to say, like, what would have to change about a workplace so that workers are involved in making investment requests. Like they're just actually how does each individual unit of production begin to kind of lay out the case for what kinds of resources it needs and what its requests are. And I think very crucially here, I draw on figures like Pat Devine and Fikret Adaman and saying that, you know, in the end, this shouldn't be the decision only of the workers in each unit of production. It needs to also crucially involve all kinds of other people, especially when we're talking about larger units of production, like end users should be involved. And also other kind of community groups who feel like they are affected by the decisions, by the structure and organization and output of different units of production. Then there's a second question, which is like, how do you decide which investment requests to fund? Who gets to decide that? I think that there, you know, it's really, in the end, it has to be a story in which you have investment boards. There have to be these new kinds of structures in society that replace our financial system and that are responsible for kind of going through the different investment requests and figuring out which ones to fund and which ones not to fund. And that, I think, you know, a lot of this comes down to the question, how are these boards organized and what kinds of information are they able to access? How do we ensure that they're democratically organized? And, you know, I have a lot to say about that, but I would say that just in the basic terms, it's really about a world in which there are these investment boards that are organized sectorally as well as geographically. There's also kind of, you know, regional and global investment boards that are kind of tasked with making, you know, sort of compiling different options and giving society the biggest choices that it faces. And really, you know, also, I think at the largest level or at the aggregate level, there have to be big proposals that are being made, for example, with regard to, you know, if society decides we want to over time reduce the amount of work we're doing. We want to reduce labor hours required per person from 40 to 35 to 30 or lower over the next decade. You know, there would have to be resources set aside for specific programs like that, which in our times would be called like industrial policy programs. And also, of course, you know, the big one would be climate change, like the idea of setting aside resources and looking for specific ways to coordinate across investment boards to really transform how these things are done. Now, I'm not saying that this process is going to be, you know, if you were to describe in theory how capitalist financial system works to reallocate resources across society, there'd be a huge difference between the theoretical story of how that would work and then what it actually looks like on the ground and how many resources are wasted, you know, in that process. What I'm talking about, which involves this kind of back and forth between individual workplace units making proposals and investment boards, which are really like composed of delegates from all the different units of production and community groups and so on, as well as like, you know, relating to overall A kind of, you know, regional or global investment boards. I mean, it's going to be pretty complicated and we could talk about like specifically how it'd be done. And I think, yeah, of course it will generate a lot of, you know, debates and problems. I'm not in my vision of socialism is not one in which we're overcoming conflicts. It's one in which we are kind of bringing those out and making them political. And in which, you know, political conflicts persist over time and, you know, generate different possibilities about how society should be organized. But my view is that, you know, this This sort of what would inevitably be a kind of ramshackle hulking way for society to move forward would over time generate a world in which people were substantially happier because many of the things that they care about would actually be priorities in how society's resources are used. And over time that would within I think, you know, I would say within like 25 to 50 years, it would dramatically transform the very basic infrastructures of society. How people's needs are met. The most important needs people have would actually float to the surface and become the ones that society focuses on and over time. And over time, actually, there'd be less need for investment and over time there'd actually be less for these investment boards to do once this very, you know, chaotic period of transformation unfolds through one or two generations. So I'm not I'm not like a utopian in the sense that I think, you know, here's this way of doing things that would be incredibly efficient and suddenly would resolve all problems. It's more like, you know, how can we, you know, frail and conflicted and problematic people sort of like shrug our way towards a world that actually meets our needs and in which, you know, I think the most crucial thing in which, you know, the meeting of our needs sort of fades into the background conditions of our life and humanity emerges from that, like just renewed and transformed and able to kind of like really live in a world that meets their needs and that allows them to pursue their passions in a really, yeah, in a new and fascinating way. So that's the that's the cell. Well, it's a hard sell, I have to say, because the the what is super beautiful and, and awesome. And I think a very good sell that because the proposition is that everybody gets basic, basically, like fundamental security and well being in all of their lives. And this is, of course, a fantastic sell. But the how is really, really, really, really hard to say, I would say, because, I mean, you touched on the aspect of narrative in terms of if we look at capitalism, and if we would be honest about the narrative, then it would be very, very different from where capitalists pretend, you know, but still, the the in terms of storyline, it's, of course, very, like, also quick sell, because you say, Okay, we have this orientation towards profit. This is like the best way to to organize things in an efficient way. Finished. That's it. You know, that's the storyline. And it's a it's a storyline that is easy to sell, not in the sense that most of the people might actually believe it or might really think that it's, it's complex enough to describe what reality really looks like. But it's like a very quick understanding of a basic rationale of organizing things. And on this level, I think it's pretty important to, to develop some kind of narrative approach towards what you want to sell on the what side, and that it's important to develop some kind of narrative approach towards the how question as well, that is a better sell, because ultimately, we would have to, like, gain people's minds and hearts, you know, and for that, they will not join into this idea and project, so to speak. If the the proposition on the how to do things is, okay, we will have to like drug ourselves through this long period of chaos. And I don't mean it in a in the sense that I do not believe it to be true. What you're stating in terms of it always is and needs to be a political process. This is absolutely right. And you're absolutely right on these terms. I just think that there needs to be a different type of narrative that is not dishonest, but more sexy that needs to be woven around it, I guess. Yeah, well, I mean, you know, I think that that's not hard to do, in a way. I think that, you know, I'm, I'm really trying to think about how institutionally it would work. And I think that's a very difficult question. I think the way to, you know, sell this is not as hard as it seems in a certain way, because I think that the story of capitalism in the 20th century is really that dynamic growth was through planning. And that the benefit of planning is the capacity, there's a few, there's a few really big benefits to planning. One is this recent, you know, realization that has really come back with the work of Mariana Mazzucato, which is to say that, you know, basically, capitalists don't really do basic research and development anymore. Like, maybe if you go back to the tinkers of the first industrial revolution, and maybe the second one, they did. But as the production system has become this massive industrial technical complex in which, you know, universities and research institutions are as important as anything else in determining what our long term production possibilities are, most of that research and development has taken place through the state. Through public investment, right. So a world that I'm talking about would be a world in which much more of that, right, would be an evidence, a lot more of the basic research that has to be done would actually happen. It would happen in a very different way. Because, yeah, it would be it would be rational, rather than in the service of business. But then also in terms of actual implementation, like, you know, there are a lot of things about the Soviet Union that were a mess, but the thing they discovered there was the possibility of coordinated long term planning. And when we look at, you know, how did East Asia develop so quickly across all of those societies, they were learning those lessons about long term coordinated dynamic planning. So there are massive, as it were, efficiency gains and long term growth potential gains that come from planning. The problem to my mind is that, you know, the type of planning we've seen so far in the world has been undertaken by states which were mostly concerned with military questions. First of all, a lot of the basic research that Mazzicato is talking about, it's all happening through the US military industrial complex. It's not good stuff. You know, it's great that we have GPS, but it's important to recognize that the main reason that stuff was developed was to, you know, improve missile targeting and stuff like that. That's not the world we want to live in, right. But also, you know, where dynamic planning of this highly efficient sort was undertaken in like the big central industries and, you know, in the Soviet Union, but also Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, China, you know, and in other places as well. It's really been in the service, if not of long term profitability, then of rapid increases in productive capacities, and it was deeply, deeply destructive for workers lives. You know, these were basically societies where a lot of the work is run in a kind of military barracks style. And a world in which, you know, basically like large parts of the world's massively polluting activities were redirected towards these high growth areas, and that was because they had such a tight control over, you know, technocratic control over what happened. Like, yeah, people were exposed to all of these harmful chemicals and the earth was, you know, just a lot of areas were destroyed. So we have, like, we want the potential of radical transformation and open possibilities that come with planning. We want that to be deeply democratic. Like, we want it to serve the actual needs people have. I mean, it's so weird to say we should live in a world where we use our investment resources in a way that best promotes human happiness. That's what we should actually be aiming at. And I think when you study human happiness and you study its components and you think about, like, why are people so unhappy in a lot of capitalist societies, you'll just see like, you know, the profit profitability driven or technocratic production output driven modes of planning or of market life just aren't actually good at meeting the multifaceted character of human needs. And yes, introducing that, you know, introducing that dimension of the additional criteria that actually need to be met to make people happy will make for a more complex democratic and ramshackle process. But again, I think, you know, that will actually lead to a better world. Like, I want to live in a world where, you know, we actually feel like we are, we are, we are, we are, you know, giving our productive resources to the next generations in a way that is actually like giving them a gift. You know, something important, something that we've spent a lot of time making this productive apparatus actually good for promoting human happiness and that people should feel proud of that. And I think it's like a real sign of the world we live in that the younger generations feel like they've inherited a gigantic mess of problems and that their lives are likely to be substantially worse in many ways than the generations that came before them. I don't think that, you know, unless you're willing to participate both in like the real dynamic potentials of long-term planning, but also the conflicts, right, involved in that, we're not going to get to that world where we actually can pass something on that we're really proud of. And I think, you know, people want to be proud. But yeah, anyway, there's a lot to say about the contemporary politics of nostalgia and how backward-looking it is rather than forward-looking. So that's not the world that I want to live in. I don't know, does that sound a little bit better? Well, yes, I mean, it definitely sounds better in the sense that the general idea of democratic planning, I think this is a great sell. So I would absolutely agree that this is precisely on the point that you mentioned in your last words, on the point of like regaining some sense of hope. And precisely in this regard, it is a very, very, very great and good sell. I think it's more on the on the side of exploding quantity of negotiation and you call it ramshackliness and on this side where it gets kind of difficult to make it a good sell. And I think what needs to be done is to to develop a better idea of which processes could be applied in order to achieve this negotiations that need to take place in a way that is, again, to our well-being and that it is organized in a way that is actually pleasant and not a drudgery. Again, I think it would be good to to kind of have some sketches of how this democratic negotiation could take place in a in a fashion that is actually empowering and positive and not like a huge waste of time to be a bit polemic. Yeah, I mean, I have two things to say about that. One is that I think that the mistake of the past was to not distinguish between investment decisions that are the decisions that transform the shape of our productive apparatus over time. And, you know, all of the kind of static allocation decisions that are like, you know, which of these, you know, which of these train car making units should get the steel tubing kind of questions. Those are like static allocation questions and I think that we should really think about how to organize those without democratic negotiation. So I'm saying that we should reserve democratic negotiation for the most important decision society has to make. And it's really important to point out that, you know, in today's not in China, you know, investment accounts for half of GDP. So half of activity is investment, but in most, you know, sort of in the large core capitalist countries, you know, at best investment accounts for about 15% of GDP. So we're talking about having intense democratic negotiations, you know, with these layered forms and so on, only for a very small share of the total activity that goes on in this economy. The most important activity, the transformative activity. I think that's really crucial. So that's really important. Then you might ask the question, well, how is this non negotiated activity going to take place? I think that's a very important question. But the other thing I would say is that, you know, in the debates of the past, there was this idea that the only two options were central planning in a market society. And anytime people looked at the kind of third term of a democratically organized planning apparatus, they said, look, this takes too much time, this is too much negotiation and so on. And I think, again, one of the key solutions to that is to say, no, no, no, what we're negotiating about are these world shaping decisions, not all decisions. But the second thing is to say, today, we have these incredible resources of digital technologies that can really transform even the way those decisions are made to make them much more streamlined, to make the much more for much more transparency, where transparency is possible. And also to, you know, really in a very easy way, make it possible for people to see a lot of data about the world they live in and the decisions they have to face and, you know, to make decisions about it. So I think that for me, one of the big problems with ideas about digital socialism today is that they tend to think about how can we use these technologies to make decisions for us? How can we use algorithms and so on to replace human supervisors and managers and CEOs and making decisions? Whereas to me, that really misses the point. The point is, how can we actually use these technologies to achieve a more complex form of negotiation, but exactly in a way you're talking about to streamline the process? So, yeah, those are two really crucial points I would make about why this form of, you know, actually a more complex society that I'm describing doesn't lead to an explosion of negotiations, because no, I don't think anyone wants to live in a world like that. And how would these big decisions actually be made? I mean, this could include a variety of approaches, and that's why I would like to couple it to a more general question, which would be what is democracy to you? Or what does it actually mean if we say we need to find ways in order to decide about these like large infrastructural investments democratically? Because this could, of course, mean a whole lot of different things. Some just think it's majority voting. Others are hopefully a bit more complex than that. I'm always interested also in the lot as some kind of additional mechanism to use, but it could mean so much different things. And I would be interested in what you think how to approach these questions. I do not already have an image in my mind of how you would like to approach these large investment questions and how we all would be able to be involved in a meaningful way. Yeah, I think that that's a really crucial question. And I think that I, you know, in a lot of ways, the tradition I've been drawn to is a tradition of a kind of associational socialism that comes out of, you know, guild socialism and a variety of maybe councilism, but is really differentiated by the idea that a socialist society would need to like develop a rich associational culture. And that doesn't only mean associations of workers in each production unit, but really rich associations, for example, of the places where, you know, research is happening, where training is happening for different types of skilled workers. So something like producer associations, you know, associations of people who are, you know, whether this is something of like the time, you know, I think there's all these really interesting questions of like, what would be different kinds of producer groups, but you can imagine, you know, associations of cleaners, associations of, you know, teachers, of engineers, all of these different groups, not just organized by workplace, but in a way like, you know, as the keepers of a part of the technical knowledge of society, I think that, you know, to me, the Hayek critique, which says that all the knowledge that we need to run society can't ever be contained in one head or even a small number of heads, that's actually really important. And it's a pushback against some of the directions that computer or algorithmic socialists want to go in. You know, the world I'm talking about is a world where we actually like trust and respect and dignify all of the different kinds of knowledges that go into making up our worlds and without which we couldn't have the world we live in. And many of those forms of knowledges are not dignified in our world, right? We don't think we refer to all of these different people who care for children or who clean, you know, buildings and houses as if they were like unskilled and undignified in their work. In my view, you know, all of this work would have to be dignified and it would have to be, you know, the people involved in all of these different kinds of skilled activities, including those currently labeled unskilled, would have to play a real role in making decisions about how society is organized. So we have, on the one hand, people engaged in actual production units. We have associations of producers who are like the keepers of the joint stock of technical knowledge of society. And we also have all kinds of civic associations. I think part of why we want to live in a world of free time, you know, a world where people have a lot more free time is so that people have time to pursue their passions and whatever it is individually that gives them meaning in their lives. But I think a lot of the things that give people meaning will lead them to kind of clump together into all different kinds of voluntary civic associations for all different kinds of purposes, whether it's playing chess or researching, you know, all different kinds of questions or, you know, dance groups or groups aimed at justice and reparations for past injustice. And that all of these different associations that make up social life would have to be involved in this planning process. So there's like a directly democratic component that's like our participation as individuals and maybe using a lottery system, you know, in the end, I think it's going to be a melange and it's going to be culturally different in different societies. But I think the thing I would stress that's different is the idea that the extent to which the democratic discovery process actually works, like the extent to which investment decisions actually lead to greater happiness, depends a lot on the vitality and kind of interconnectedness of this rich associational life of a socialist society. And the question is, how do these different associations and producer organizations and investment boards, how do they interact to kind of like make decisions about what the best, you know, what are the next best ways to use our resources to make people happy? And I think there, you know, there's some principle of subsidarity that I think like you maybe were indicating, like not just plebiscites in which everyone is involved in making the decisions, but rather that, you know, on a first pass, decisions should be made by those who are most affected by them. And again, I don't think that that's something where we can just say in a technical way, these are the people who really need to have the most say in this decision. I think it's a political question, you know, if people are, you know, if there's an industrial process that's generating a lot of noise or pollution of some kind, and there's a local community group that says, hey, we're really affected by what they're doing here, you know, they should be able to fight for inclusion in the investment decisions of that of that board. So, or of that production unit and that, yeah, so it's, to me, the crucial missing point in a lot of this is the rich associational life that I think is crucial for a socialist society, both in terms of freedom, you know, just free activity, but also like political activity and ensuring that, you know, people's voices are actually heard and also for organizing, you know, in this more in a deep way how production takes place. I'm less willing to kind of give you an exact account of like, you know, what are the proportions of like people in production units versus like producer associations versus civic associations, you know, how should these be arrayed and should they be by lottery? Should they be delegates? Should they be representatives? You know, like, I think that those are ultimately questions for people to experiment and figure out. I also think people could do research on it and try to make really big proposals now, but all I have for you at the moment is a kind of sketch and really emphasizing that I think too often when people talk about socialism, they only think about individuals and coordinating mechanisms and they don't think about all of the intermediary bodies and associations that actually go between those things and empower individuals and organize them and kind of actually make it possible to undertake the real debates that lead to people getting what they want. I also think there's a lot of problems with associational life. There's a lot of reasons why people turn to direct democracy. But yeah, that's all kind of a larger story, but that's at least an initial sketch. Yeah, interesting. I mean, it kind of hints towards the Hen and Egg question as well, because as far as I understand it, you do not want to propose some kind of meso or macro level mechanism of coordination, but you think that a rich associational life, as you call it, would kind of, I mean, quote unquote, organically bring about some kind of organizational form that is in a much more deeper way, democratic and still effective in meeting people's needs. I should say the one caveat I'd make there is I'm not saying somehow these associations will just make the decisions. I'm saying that you would need to have very clear rules about who's on investment boards and how those investment boards are making decisions and how those decisions can be appealed. You know, there'd have to be very clear institutional structures. I just think that, you know, the actual institutional structures would probably vary a lot by sector of society, geographically, experimentally. I think it would be ludicrous to say that there's one single technical way to ensure that democracy takes place. And I actually think that it's a very dangerous idea to think that we can propose the exact structure, because the reality is that human beings will always be looking for ways to, you know, I think people are very cooperative and that under the right conditions, you know, people will work together to find the best outcomes for everybody. But that's not all people do. People also find ways to get around formal structures, right? And make formal structures into mere letters that, you know, where they're able to evade the spirit of them. So I don't think we can solve problems only by creating, you know, what we think of as good democratic institutional structures. But I am certainly not advocating for, you know, some merely organic, oh, somehow it all works out. No, no, no, you need really clear rules. It's just that, yeah, it's hard to say in an obvious way what those rules would be. Yeah, okay, great. That's a good addition, actually. It's good that you mentioned that, because, I mean, that's, of course, what I was trying to push you towards some statements that try to pin down at least some of these rules, maybe in terms of how the investment boards would actually function or come about and stuff like that. I mean, there could be a rough sketch of how these things might be approached without saying that they should definitely be approached like that. But I think it's still helpful to engage in this kind of thinking without the hypocrisy of believing that this will be the one best and only way, of course, you know. I'm always favoring approaches which acknowledge that, as you do, just to make that clear, I'm always favoring approaches that acknowledge that you need actually both of it, you know, like some prefigurative way of approaching this learning, this living, this practice, and additionally, some form of engaging with the questions of how to organize it in very practical terms. Because I think it's also necessary, not only in terms of having a clearer idea of what we might strive for, but also in terms of like practical communication and making it a sensible and understandable idea for people that we want to join in the effort, somehow, I guess. Yeah, I mean, let me say, like, I think that the example that I, and again, I mean, I'm in the midway of thinking about these things, so I'm not ready yet to, I think that I could imagine having a much clearer and more exciting version of the story, but you've definitely, I'm definitely talking to you about it in the midpoint of thinking about it. But an example I sometimes give people is like, imagine that, you know, there's a transportation sector of society, it includes all these different things like, you know, production plants that make cars, but that also other ones, you know, and there's a variety of them engaged in car making. There's a variety of different groups experimenting with like micro mobility systems and then there's groups that are managing and expanding the public transportation system. And, you know, you could imagine a situation in which there's a lot of demand for cars, like people really want to, you know, individuals want to order more, you know, personal car automobiles to drive in and that, you know, and the car producers can show like, you know, look, there's a really strong demand for our product. Like we were running at the limits of our productive capacities, we really want to expand this production and in a capitalist society, you know, that would mean that like the equivalent of that would be that like car production would be very, you know, profitable. The stocks of car companies would be rising and suddenly car companies would have access to all of this additional funding, and they would start building all these production plants and promising, you know, we're going to make green cars this time and like all this kind of stuff and that I think any system that just has a, you know, some kind of mechanism that mimics the profit system. And there's various ways that socialists have tried to think about it, but a system which simply says, when there's pressure on production, we reorient our supplies to increase production misses the way that a real socialist society might would obviously respond by saying, Hey, this is not going to solve the climate crisis. There's all of these people who are being negatively impacted by us having so many cars and like the reason people want cars is because of the unavailability of all of these other means of transportation and the best thing for society is that, you know, we really don't give more resources to car production. We put it instead into improving public transportation and micromobility and all these other kinds of things and, you know, coordinating that kind of investment against the ways that, you know, it adds another layer to the problem that on the one hand, you have individuals trying to live their lives, given the options available to them and saying the public transportation system currently sucks or it's breaking down, like I need a car to live my life. That's what that's what's leading people to want more cars. But then from this social perspective, being able to take that information and say, okay, we can study these problems and we can try to find alternative temporary solutions and long term solutions to the transportation problem that are more ecologically sustainable, that are more socially sustainable and so on. And I'm just saying those decisions will have to be made in a holistic but also conflictual way. There's going to be, you know, I don't I don't believe we should be so naive as to think that like, you know, just because people live in a socialist society, they will they will say like, oh, well, you know, we shouldn't do these things are going to harm two generations down the road in terms of ecological consequences. I think there's going to be debates about those things. Right. And so it matters who's on these boards, like how are the boards being filled, partially by, you know, let's say, I don't know, in some random way, like a third of the the population of the boards would be delegates from all of the different production units involved in transportation. A third of them would be sort of like tech groups that represent a certain kind of technical knowledge drawn from producer associations that are involved in transportation and climate and all of these kinds of questions. And a third of them would be end users and civic society groups. They'd be looking at this problem of like, how are we requesting resources for transportation? How are these coming up bottom up from the producer units? You know, them talking about the productive, you know, the stress on their productive capacities, what they need more of, you know, how are we how are we aggregating and visualizing and interpreting this information coming from the units? But also, how are we thinking about how transportation fits into the larger society? How it interfaces with all these other intermediate inputs they need? And, you know, making decisions within these boards about, you know, which units to fund and which not. And the point is that because these decisions aren't merely about like cost, like about equivalents of profitability, like cost reduction, you know, we might say, well, you know, we like this micromobility, we're going to fund them because they're serving society in a variety of ways. They're, you know, they're ensuring their production is ecologically sustainable. They're, you know, figuring out ways to like improve the satisfaction of workers in these units. And the units that are selling that are, you know, have higher demand for their product, because they're willing to cut all these corners and they're generating all these problems. They're not automatically going to get more resources because they're they're producing at a cheaper, you know, they're producing a product that uses fewer resources, there's going to be decisions that are going to be made that are going to be holistic about, you know, which particular units like get resources to expand and also, you know, the shape of reallocation of resources across different sectors of production and society, because those decisions are being made holistically and in this multi criteria way. It like frees producer units and, you know, producer associations and civil associations to think in a much more expansive way about how to use our resources to meet our many sided needs. It actually allows all of the different like positive knowledges that are coming from the bottom up and that are coming from research groups to like filter into and transform production in a way that's impossible in the kind of in a market society where, you know, ultimately driving down costs relative to the prices you're able to charge is what's driving, you know, is what's determining what the incentives for people, you know, it's what accesses their motivations and it's what provides information to society and it's what transforms what actually happens. I don't know if that's like a little bit more specific, but, you know, yeah, I think it's, I don't know, still working on it. Yeah, I mean, I'm absolutely sold on like most of it in the sense of that. I think it's an absolutely great proposition that you put out there in terms of what we might achieve and what is there to gain because there's so much to gain. And I think this is a really, really strong part in the way that you talk about it. For me, it's still a little difficult to imagine a way of how these different associations really like are coordinating between each other on the macro, on the micro level and the middle level. And I mean, it's just a huge task to think about this. And I think it's actually not possible to have definite answers. And I think you're correct to point out that this is something that needs to be tried and experiments tested and understood and learned and stuff like that. So I think that's something where we can leave it with at this point and kind of go with a very, very energizing and positive elements within these ideas that you have. And one of them is this proposition that there are, as I understand it, universal basic services, no matter what. So there is none of this, let me be frank, bullshit of like you have some kind of Arbeitszeitkonto. I don't know the English word for that, but I mean, there are quite some proposals, socialist proposals where you actually end up with some kind of Lohnarbeit, some kind of work that you are forced to do at the threat of not having an existence. And I mean, I really do not understand how anybody can go forward and put a proposal out there, which has this still as a nucleus of how to approach things. And I was very pleased to hear and read that you seem to approach it very differently and go forward and state that. Of course, everybody has a home, everybody has transportation, health, something to eat, clothing and all of this, because we do have this abundance and it's more about how we should share it in a way that is good for everybody and good for the environment as well. And that's the actual question and not how we should be petty about this person has worked less than me and stuff like that. So maybe you could sketch how you advocate for something like this universal basic services that are unconditional, as I understand it. And maybe how this is related to an instinct many people might have in a capitalist society that there needs to be some kind of compulsion to work to make things happen, which I highly doubt. Yeah, I think that that's a really interesting question. And I think for me, where I started to think about it is the idea of the money motivator, which is precisely we're talking about the idea that people won't work unless they are working under the threat of starvation. And, you know, there's a kind of positive, not positive in the sense of a good idea, but just, you know, there's a there's an idea of a kind of positive prescription that comes with that negative threat, which is the idea that the more you pay people, the better work they'll do. Right. And that's what I was very interested in research on this idea of pay for performance that you get better work out of people the more you pay them and it seems so obvious within a capitalist society that that must be true. And there's in fact like a whole field of research of efficiency wages like this whole there's so much research based on the idea that, you know, the what motivates people to work is how much money you pay them. And what these researchers find, which I think is very provocative and which socialists need to pay a lot more attention to, is that it's just not true that people do better work the more you pay them. And this has been a big issue in places like, you know, all of these Google and, you know, the big tech companies where the workers that they employ, really, they have no trouble getting another job. It's very hard to have any oversight over the work they're doing. It's so technically complex and integrated with all the other work people are doing. And, you know, these big tech companies really need to understand how to motivate people. And these companies themselves come up against the limits of this idea of money motivation, especially when the workers that they are employing are not so affected by scarcity. They're not really worried that if they don't work, they're not going to have a home and so on. And what all these researchers show is, like, basically that the key to motivation is really that, like, for these, you know, highly paid workers is that once their fear of not meeting their needs fades into the background, what really matters is their experience of the work, like how much autonomy they have and carrying out their work process. And there's all of these fascinating studies that are precisely about reducing the amount of time people spend in meetings. So it's really about, you know, and I think that that's something socialists should learn from. Because I think the idea that socialism is about people in workplaces having a lot of meetings is really destructive. And this research about, you know, actually getting people out of meetings and creating a world that actually has more responsibility and trust for individuals is actually very important and something that socialists should draw from, too. But anyway, there's a theory of autonomy there. There's an account of competence or skills that people like to use their skills and, you know, kind of refine their skills over time and get better at things. And the third thing is that people want to feel a sense of purpose in their work. They want to feel not like there's something that their work is important in ways that they don't understand, but to really understand why their work matters. And I guess that in my view, like, you know, obviously a world where a world where we meet everyone's needs is a world in which some people are just not going to work, you know, and, you know, and those people are called like lazy or scroungers or whatever. Like, you know, I think it's interesting to think about what's going on with people for whom that's the case, and we can talk about that. But for most people, like, the reality is that we can transform work in a way that actually makes it more satisfying for people. And the results of this research is not about the idea that work should become play. And I think that is this very false idea that socialists have kind of labored under that attractive work means playful work. I don't think that that's true. I think attractive work is meaningful work, where people have a lot of autonomy and feel like that they are actually useful, that their skills that they've developed actually allow them to do something that, you know, that other people can't do. Those things like actually make it possible to imagine a world in which people feel like their work is important and an important part of the meaning of their lives without being the totality of their lives and also without being something that, you know, they only do because they have to, you know, as a way to earn an income. And I think we can get to a world where actually like, you know, and this would require a lot of transformation of work, but we can get to a world where we meet everyone's needs and those things fade into the background, but in which people still have a motivation to work. And a study of the actual reasons why people work even in our society really provides a lot of positive ideas about what that could look like for everyone. So to me, the idea of, yeah, like living in a world where we meet everyone's needs, where there's a lot of basic services that are just provided freely in which everyone has a kind of base income that they can use to get, you know, to find the more specific things they want. Those are just essential features of the world. And if people think that in addition, and I think in a transitional period, it would be very important to also maybe have some additional income that comes from work hours, you know, that would be, that's fine. I think that's up for people to decide and I don't think that you can have a, my idea about socialism is that it's like a proliferation of different ways of dealing with these fundamental problems. And I think one of those things would be incomes policy. Like, you know, how do we think like, yeah, how do we think like incomes should be organized? I think it's a political question. But the core is that people have these free giving basic services that make up a large part of society's actual output, and that people have basic income. So, you know, some people like to go on vacation more, some people like to live in a bigger home and stick around in it more, you know, those are kinds of trade offs that every individual should be able to make. And the people under those conditions who don't want to work, you know, that's, it's like, how, what should we do with, with people like that? You know, presumably, I think it actually wouldn't be very many people. Some people would just be constitutionally like they don't like to work and fine, let them live on their, you know, income and the services of society. It's probably okay with people if the rest of their lives are okay to just ignore those people. But then there's also the question of like, yeah, you know how I think a lot of people who wouldn't want to work in that scenario are actually people who are, you know, they're, they're depressed. There's all kinds of things that happen to people in their lives that require them to withdraw for a time from society and just be free to kind of redevelop their engagement with the world. And I think that the freedom for grief, depression, self-transformation, those are actually going to be really fundamental parts of what it means to live in a socialist society. You know, like one of the worst things about our world to me is that, you know, people lose, they lose people they love, you know, to disease or, you know, and other ways of loss. And they, they experience grief and our society doesn't really give people the time to recover from that and reinvent themselves and transform and reengage with the world. So anyway, I think we can have a much more, you know, a more positive conversation about what it means when people don't want to work. But that's kind of my, my basic account there. I don't know. What do you think? No, I love it. I love it. And I think I have to kind of step back at least a little from my little rant there in my question, because I would totally agree that it's important to try out different ways. It's a precondition that it should always be possible that somebody does not want to work and still gets all of these unconditional basic services that you are talking about. I think this is for me a precondition for all of this. But then from there, going from there, I think it might be totally reasonable and interesting to try out different ways of, for example, how long one has to work in order to receive some additional income or not. I mean, if there are certainly jobs that are more pleasant than others, and it would be somewhat reasonable to say, okay, if it's a really, really pleasant job, and I am a whatever musician or anything, or a doctor, which is really can be a very meaningful job, then I will simply work longer than the person that is cleaning the toilets, for example, to have a stark comparison there. And that is not to say that cleaning the toilets cannot also be a meaningful job. But still, I think that there might be a sensible way to find different mechanisms to use in order to organize these questions. And speaking of mechanisms, in some of your texts, in some parts of your texts, you kind of hinted towards mechanism design, but you never really dive into it. You never really make it explicit. And I was wondering, because the ways in which I stumbled over mechanism design, and I do not have any in-depth knowledge about it, but it always seemed to me as if it's mostly standing on the shoulders of really false assumptions. So I was wondering what your opinion is on mechanism design, and I mean, game theory in a broader sense, maybe. I guess that in my view, something that's really essential is to recognize that some of the things that we've been talking about to kind of draw them together, that maybe I only talked about it indirectly, but human happiness has all of these different components that are really important. You know, socialists have tended to focus a little too much on material goods and services and not on all of the other parts of what go into making people happy. And I think that's really important to think about, happiness having these multiple aspects, some of which are material, some of which are social and personal. Work motivation is also multiple. You know, people work in order to gain access to income that they need or that they could use to get more stuff, maybe in different kinds of socialist societies that would be part of it as well. But people are also motivated by all these other things, right, by these kinds of intrinsic motivations to find meaning in their lives, to use skills they have and to show their worth and so on. And then also that in order to take into account the multiple ends that people have, investment would have to be organized very differently. And I think for me, all of these things point to this kind of multi-criteria sense of the world, the way that the world and our needs and desires and possibilities are more complex than can one fit into money requires, and we mentioned this earlier, like the abolition of money as a general equivalent. That doesn't mean that I'm saying we should go into a world where there's no measure, there's no number, we're abolishing all that stuff. It actually means a world with a different set of organizing quantitative indicators and also, you know, the ways that those are used to allocate resources and make decisions and so on. But what I want to get at is that for me, it's really important to separate the kind of the sort of accounting system that gives people access to the things they need to live from the accounting system that internally organizes the production, you know, the production of goods and services. I think separating those and having multiple, as it were, kind of tokens that have different functions, a kind of consumption token and production tokens, that's really important to me. Because it's only when we separate those that we actually gain access to the vast variety of ends that people have, personally, the different social and political ends of society and the different kind of motivations that people can have for work. That separation and the breakdown of that monetary equivalent is the crucial thing that allows us to play and expand on all of these different possibilities. So when I think of mechanism design, I'm really thinking of the organization of the production token system. And I don't, I'm not that, I think, you know, one thing about mechanism design is this idea of like, how do we get people to provide information rather than holding it close to their chest? You know, how are we going to solve this problem that in the end, we need to know things that it's beneficial for people sometimes to hide, you know, and they're trying to imagine different ways of organizing markets or auctions to have this kind of quality. But I think to me, what's special about it, what differentiates the time we live in from the past is that, you know, in the time of Adam Smith, really like people thought of markets as this like natural institution that had like one way of organizing it. And over time, you know, through Marx, but then really into the 20th century now, especially with digital technologies. I think people recognize that, you know, organizing auction, like all these different ways of organizing non dialogic types of processes for allocating resources. They can be designed like we can design those mechanisms and shape them in different ways. And to me, in my essay on algorithms and protocols, that's what I was thinking about, about all the different ways of designing those systems, and also of, you know, experimentally, like looking at the systems that we design and then transforming them over time. I think that there's a lot of potential there. And I think that a lot of allocation should be organized in a way that involves these production tokens that people are trading in something that, you know, could look like a market or an auction and have different forms. But crucially, it doesn't, it's not linked to the amount of income that people are personally receiving. It's actually like trying to use these tokens to generate a situation in which producer groups can make rational decisions about which inputs they want to try to go for. And also kind of can see how, what their, what their sort of relative bargaining power is against other associations. So, you know, like, you know, hospitals should have a certain ability to kind of like edge other producers out of the way in their demand for the kind of fundamental inputs that they need to make, I don't know, medical equipment or something like that. And, you know, other producers who make, I don't know, like, like little spinning toys for kids should be differently located in terms of their ability to kind of like bid for different kinds of resources. So I think that we can imagine, and that to me, again, it's very important. So there's a theory there of like the abolition of money and the separation out of these different components of money that frees us to access all these different aspects of human possibility. And the design of, you know, mechanisms, market like auction, whatever they look like, that kind of makes it possible for a lot of allocation, static allocation questions to be organized in an efficient way. That can be that we could turn rational and that people can sort of say what's fair and unfair in how that allocation takes place, then also frees our time for the most important questions to be solved via this democratic investment board dynamic planning process, if that makes sense. So that's how, in my view, the mechanism design stuff fits in. It's not specifically what the mechanism design people say. It's the general idea that now with the tools that we have, especially digital tools, we can design these kinds of like, you know, games or allocation protocols that operate in a kind of simple way and rational way that are not like the markets we have in a capitalist society and that organize information and incentives differently. That's only a brief introduction to that, though, because it's a complicated question. Nice. And I'm very much looking forward to hearing more about it, because this is, I mean, this is some form of concreteness towards possible procedures and protocols that you provide. And I think, as I said before, this might be important to at least put out some kind of approach that might work towards these questions of static allocation, as you call it. OK, so I think we do have an idea of this multi-criteria democratic planning that you are trying to describe. And I guess many of our listeners will have thought at some point, how do we get there? So the question of transformation is, of course, a huge one. But I really like the way that you end your book, Automation and the Future of Work, because you really strongly emphasize that this is, of course, a political project and not a merely technocratic one. And that we will need movements, that we will need the power of movements to make some form of democratic planning possible. And I think it was really a strong finish that you have there in your book. And I actually just simply like to quote you here and then hear your thoughts on how this transformation could actually be approached. And this is a quote, actually the end words from your book. So we do not want to remain mere techno utopian mystics. How do we approach the question of transformation? Yeah, I mean, the thing that I always say to people when they ask me that question is just to point out that, you know, we aren't just living in some random moment in history. Like we're living in a time in which, you know, the reason why we're, I think one of the main reasons why we're having this conversation today is because it's already been 10 years of big social struggles unfolding across the world that have really opened up people's sense of possibilities. And, you know, it's not only these positive social movements and struggles. It's also like the limits that they faced, the kind of ways that they haven't been able to win very much. The fear that we have about, you know, the other side, the rise of all these kind of right wing populist movements and authoritarian regimes clamping down. So there's something about our moment that feels dangerous, but if it just felt dangerous, if it didn't also have these movements that give us some hope and open up and expand our sense of possibility, I think things would look very different. It's very different to be able to point to, to say, look, in the United States last year, we had the largest social movement in terms of participation, like in US history, the number of people across the country that participated in a movement that was very disruptive to society, you know, was huge. Did it win anything? No, like I'm not naive about that and I'm not going to list the like little minor victories of it to try to give one sense of optimism. I think our optimism or hope should come from the fact that many people participated in those things and saw them and are trying to figure out how to, you know, how to fulfill the potentials that those movements showed us but weren't able to fulfill themselves. And I think that, you know, we already live in a time when people are trying to figure out how to organize themselves, how to transform those movements and how to fight to make them not merely defensive struggles, but actually give them some kind of positive vision for change. And I think that, you know, a renewed socialist movement today would have to both have some account of like what we should be fighting for in the here and now, and what we think can only be achieved, like with a transition to socialism and I think we also shouldn't be so naive as to imagine that, you know, if we can just defeat the powers that be, we will spontaneously emerge into a better world. I think I used to believe that and studying all of these problems in the past few years has really convinced me that that's not really true. Like there's a lot of work to do to make these ideas seem viable and, you know, I'm interested in the long road to actually make them viable and not merely to say we figured them all out already, you know. Because I think there are some really important questions there left unresolved as our conversations made clear. But so I think that, you know, there are ways to talk about how to begin to get to this other world and and maybe, you know, I mean, and I think that those things are essentially like, you know, fighting in the here and now for reductions of the work week that will give people more free time and also more security by constricting the supply of labor. Fighting for, you know, basic services like massive opening up and investment in health, education, housing, all these different things to provide people with the means that they need to survive and to kind of try to get to a world where we're meeting our needs, the idea of our worries about meeting our needs fades into the background. And that's also very freeing for us. I think getting there is going to require socializing investment, as I've been saying, and I think, you know, we're seeing calls for something like this more public investment anyway on the part of radical Keynesians today. And I think it makes sense to think that the way that's ultimately going to go down is a battle over something like green investment, green New Deal type stuff. And the fourth thing is, you know, the call for democratizing institutions like finding ways to actually involve people in decision making about the organization of their work. And, you know, the larger decisions that shape our communities and our society. And I think that basically, like, because we are now entering the era of climate disaster in a serious way, I really think that a lot of these questions are going to be answered in and through the struggle and the battle over what the science means, what we have to do and what's possible. I think, again, that the thing we can we can fight on those terrains now. But the thing that is transformative that will require a kind of, you know, dramatic change in society and will only be possible with massive social movements fighting for change is the thing we talked about before, breaking the capital strike, breaking capital's control over how investment takes place. And that is something that, you know, isn't a reform. That isn't something we can fight for in the here and now. It's something that we have to build for in a way, but also something that, you know, will become possible when very large numbers of people are activated in our society and where there really is a viable vision that people have of an alternative to the capitalist coordination of society. I think people, you know, I think it's it's important to recognize the real transformative potentials of our moment and how far we have to go right to make that case that that another world is really possible. I think increasingly people feel that another world is necessary, but its necessity and its possibility are not necessarily the same thing. So that's I don't know. That's my initial thoughts on that question. Great. And I think especially since you highlight the climate crisis, I mean, on a very intuitive level, I think that the idea of that one can only address this global crisis with a globally coordinated reaction and that this definitely has to involve some sort of planning. And this is this is quite a strong argument for the idea of democratic planning as such. So as we talked about before, I think the this idea of democratic planned economies is in general a very attractive one right now. And that's why I'm quite hopeful, actually, that in the long run, as you stated, this is actually a real possibility. And this kind of leads me actually to my last question that I always ask, which is if you think about the future, what makes you joyful? I mean, I think that, you know, what makes me joyful is that I really think that we could, in the 21st century, make that leap to a dramatically better world. I think it's really, really close within our grasp now to reorganize, you know, our resources to make a world where no one has to worry about going hungry or not having a place to live or being cold or too hot. Which would be more likely scenario going forward, or, you know, like won't have access to means of transportation, communication, so on, like social connection. I think we can get to that world. And I think the relief that people experience from not needing anymore in that way, it will just be such a dramatic transformation in human cultural evolution. It will really, like, propel us forward to a dramatically different world. And I just think that when we think about socialism and we think about its possibilities, I just think that, you know, to me, that's where people should start. They should start from that idea of really the end of dispossession and, you know, insecurity and think about, you know, how much that will open people's world and how much more people will then want to shape the world that they live in. And I think that that's really important because I guess my fear on the other side and my hope is that we are moving into a world where there's going to be a lot more talk about planning, because it's becoming increasingly apparent to people that even, you know, even adapting, let alone mitigating to the climate, like the climate crisis, both adaption and mitigation are going to require massive planning. The refugee crisis is going to be a massive question of planning, of housing construction and, you know, and so on. But the danger is that that planning takes a form that's deeply technocratic and authoritarian. I think that's where things are kind of heading now, and that's why, you know, I put my hope in the way that the politicization of the planning question coupled to a moment in which people actually feel like, you know, they've seen social movements, they feel the potential of organizing and banding together to transform society, that we can actually get to a democratic planning society that actually does meet people's needs in a real way. And that that would be the only way to really meet people's needs. I think that we can get there. And I think, you know, I don't know, I'm so much more, maybe my ideas are a little muddled at the moment, but, you know, I'm so optimistic that this thing can be achieved, you know, and that, yeah, and that a real push in that direction might actually happen in our lifetimes. And that it needs to, it needs to happen, but it also could happen. And that's something really, yeah, that gives me a lot of hope and joy as well. Fantastic. Aaron, thank you so much for taking the time and being part of UJHistories. Thank you so much for having me. It's a great conversation. That was our show for today. Thanks a lot for listening. If you want to support future histories, you can do so on Patreon. For this, visit patreon.com slash future histories, or you can simply tell a friend that you liked the show and that he, she or they might like it as well. Thanks a lot and hear you in two weeks. 

Episode Keywords:

#FutureHistories #Podcast #AaronBenanav #JanGroos #Interview #Automation #AutomationAndTheFutureOfWork #FullEmployment #AWorldWithoutWork #ServiceWorkInThePandemicEconomy #UBS #UBI #UniversalBasicIncome #UniversalBasicServices #BGE #BedingungslosesGrundeinkommen #Arbeitspolitik #Planwirtschaft #Society #Democracy #Communism #Planarchy #SocialistCalculationDebate #Hayek #Marx #KarlMarx #PlanningDebate #DigitalSocialism #Socialism #PlannedEconomy #AssociationalSocialism #DemocraticPlanning #FutureHistoriesInternational
